Book the Second.
================

CHAPTER I.
----------

_Of a damsel which came girt with a sword for to find a man of such
virtue to draw it out of the scabbard._

After the death of Uther Pendragon reigned Arthur his son, the which
had great war in his days for to get all England into his hand. For
there were many kings within the realm of England, and in Wales,
Scotland, and Cornwall. So it befel on a time when king Arthur was at
London, there came a knight and told the king tidings how that the king
Ryons of North Wales had reared a great number of people, and were
entered into the land, and burnt and slew the king's true liege people.
If this be true, said Arthur, it were great shame unto mine estate but
that he were mightily withstood. It is truth, said the knight, for I
saw the host myself. Well, said the king, let make a cry, that all the
lords, knights, and gentlemen of arms, should draw unto a castle,
called Camelot in those days, and there the king would let make a
council general, and a great justs.

So when the king was come thither with all his baronage, and lodged as
they seemed best, there was come a damsel the which was sent on message
from the great lady Lile of Avelion. And when she came before king
Arthur, she told from whom she came, and how she was sent on message
unto him for these causes. Then she let her mantle fall that was richly
furred; and then was she girt with a noble sword, whereof the king had
marvel, and said, Damsel, for what cause are ye girt with that sword?
it beseemeth you not. Now shall I tell you, said the damsel: this sword
that I am girt withal doth me great sorrow and cumberance, for I may
not be delivered of this sword but by a knight, but he must be a
passing good man of his hands and of his deeds, and without villainy or
treachery, and without treason. And if I may find such a knight that
hath all these virtues, he may draw out this sword out of the sheath.
For I have been at king Ryons'; it was told me there were passing good
knights, and he and all his knights have assayed it, and none can
speed. This is a great marvel, said Arthur; if this be sooth, I will
myself assay to draw out the sword, not presuming upon myself that I am
the best knight, but that I will begin to draw at your sword in giving
example to all the barons, that they shall assay every one after other
when I have assayed it. Then Arthur took the sword by the sheath and by
the girdle, and pulled at it eagerly, but the sword would not out. Sir,
said the damsel, ye need not to pull half so hard, for he that shall
pull it out, shall do it with little might. Ye say well, said Arthur:
now assay ye, all my barons, but beware ye be not defiled with shame,
treachery, nor guile. Then it will not avail, said the damsel, for he
must be a clean knight without villainy, and of a gentle stock of
father side and mother side. Most of all the barons of the Round Table
that were there at that time assayed all by row, but there might none
speed; wherefore the damsel made great sorrow out of measure, and said,
Alas! I wend in this court had been the best knights, without treachery
or treason. By my faith, saith Arthur, here are good knights as I deem
any been in the world, but their grace is not to help you, wherefore I
am displeased.


CHAPTER II.
-----------

_How Balin, arrayed like a poor knight, pulled out the sword, which
afterward was cause of his death._

Then fell it so that time there was a poor knight with king Arthur,
that had been prisoner with him half a year and more, for slaying of a
knight the which was cousin unto king Arthur. The name of this knight
was called Balin, and by good means of the barons he was delivered out
of prison, for he was a good man named of his body, and he was born in
Northumberland. And so he went privily into the court, and saw this
adventure, whereof it raised his heart, and he would assay it as other
knights did, but for he was poor and poorly arrayed he put him not far
in press; but in his heart he was fully assured to do as well, if his
grace happed him, as any knight that there was. And as the damsel took
her leave of Arthur and of all the barons, so departing, this knight
Balin called unto her and said, Damsel, I pray you of your courtesy
suffer me as well to assay as these lords; though that I be so poorly
clothed, in mine heart me seemeth I am fully assured as some of these
other, and me seemeth in my heart to speed right well. The damsel
beheld the poor knight, and saw he was a likely man, but for of his
poor arrayment she thought he should be of no worship without villainy
or treachery. And then she said unto the knight, Sir, it needeth not to
put me to more pain or labour, for it seemeth not you to speed there as
other have failed. Ah, fair damsel, said Balin, worthiness and good
qualities and good deeds are not all only in arrayment, but manhood and
worship is hid within man's person, and many a worshipful knight is not
known unto all people, and therefore worship and hardiness is not in
arrayment. Ye say sooth, said the damsel, therefore ye shall assay to
do what ye may. Then Balin took the sword by the girdle and sheath and
drew it out easily, and when he looked on the sword it pleased him
much. Then had the king and all the barons great marvel that Balin had
done that adventure, and many knights had great despite of Balin.
Certes, said the damsel, this is a passing good knight, and the best
that ever I found, and most of worship without treason, treachery, or
villainy, and many marvels shall he do. Now, gentle and courteous
knight, give me the sword again. Nay, said Balin, for this sword will I
keep, but it be taken from me by force. Well, said the damsel, ye are
not wise to keep the sword from me, for ye shall slay with the sword
the best friend that ye have, and the man that ye most love in the
world, and the sword shall be your destruction. I shall take the
adventure, said Balin, that God will ordain me, but the sword ye shall
not have at this time, by the faith of my body. Ye shall repent it
within short time, said the damsel, for I would have the sword more for
your avail than for mine, for I am passing heavy for your sake; for ye
will not believe that sword shall be your destruction, and that is
great pity. With that the damsel departed, making great sorrow.

Anon after Balin sent for his horse and his armour, and so would depart
from the court, and took his leave of king Arthur. Nay, said the king,
I suppose ye will not depart so lightly from this fellowship. I suppose
that ye are displeased that I have shewed you unkindness; blame me the
less, for I was misinformed against you, but I wend you had not been
such a knight as ye are of worship and prowess, and if ye will abide in
this court among my fellowship, I shall so advance you as ye shall be
pleased. God thank your highness, said Balin, for your bounty and
highness may no man praise half to the value; but at this time I must
needs depart, beseeching you alway of your good grace. Truly, said the
king, I am right wroth for your departing: I pray you, fair knight,
that ye tarry not long, and ye shall be right welcome to me and to my
barons, and I shall amend all amiss that I have done against you. God
thank your great lordship, said Balin, and therewith made him ready to
depart. Then the most part of the knights of the Round Table said that
Balin did not this adventure all only by might, but by witchcraft.


CHAPTER III.
------------

_How the Lady of the lake demanded the knight's head that had won the
sword, or the maiden's head._

The meanwhile that this knight was making him ready to depart, there
came into the court a lady that hight the Lady of the lake. And she
came on horseback, richly beseen, and saluted king Arthur; and there
asked him a gift that he promised her when she gave him the sword. That
is sooth, said Arthur, a gift I promised you, but I have forgotten the
name of my sword that ye gave me. The name of it, said the lady, is
Excalibur, that is as much to say as Cut-steel. Ye say well, said the
king, ask what ye will and ye shall have it, and it lie in my power to
give it. Well, said the lady, I ask the head of the knight that hath
won the sword, or else the damsel's head that brought it; I take no
force though I have both their heads, for he slew my brother, a good
knight and a true, and that gentlewoman was causer of my father's
death. Truly, said king Arthur, I may not grant neither of their heads
with my worship, therefore ask what ye will else, and I shall fulfil
your desire. I will ask none other thing, said the lady. When Balin was
ready to depart he saw the Lady of the lake that by her means had slain
Balin's mother, and he had sought her three years, and when it was told
him that she asked his head of king Arthur he went to her straight and
said, Evil be you found, ye would have my head and therefore ye shall
lose yours. And with his sword lightly he smote off her head before
king Arthur. Alas! for shame, said Arthur, why have you done so? ye
have shamed me and all my court, for this was a lady that I was
beholden to, and hither she came under my safe conduct; I shall never
forgive you that trespass. Sir, said Balin, me forthinketh of your
displeasure, for this same lady was the untruest lady living, and by
enchantment and sorcery she hath been the destroyer of many good
knights, and she was causer that my mother was burnt through her
falsehood and treachery. What cause so ever ye had, said Arthur, ye
should have forborne her in my presence; therefore, think not the
contrary, ye shall repent it, for such another despite had I never in
my court: therefore withdraw you out of my court in all haste that ye
may. Then Balin took up the head of the lady, and bare it with him to
his hostry, and there he met with his squire, that was sorry he had
displeased king Arthur, and so they rode forth out of the town. Now,
said Balin, we must part; take thou this head and bear it to my
friends, and tell them how I have sped, and tell my friends in
Northumberland that my most foe is dead. Also tell them how I am out of
prison, and also what adventure befel me at the getting of this sword.
Alas, said the squire, ye are greatly to blame for to displease king
Arthur. As for that, said Balin, I will hie me in all the haste that I
may, to meet with king Ryons and destroy him, or else to die therefore;
and if it may hap me to win him, then will king Arthur be my good and
gracious lord. Where shall I meet with you? said the squire. In king
Arthur's court, said Balin. So his squire and he departed at that time.
Then king Arthur and all the court made great dole, and had shame of
the death of the Lady of the lake. Then the king buried her richly.


CHAPTER IV.
-----------

_How Merlin told the adventure of this damsel._

At that time there was a knight the which was the king's son of
Ireland, and his name was Lanceor, the which was an orgulous knight,
and counted himself one of the best of the court, and he had great
despite at Balin for the achieving of the sword, that any should be
accounted more hardy, or of more prowess; and he asked king Arthur if
he would give him leave to ride after Balin, and to revenge the despite
that he had done. Do your best, said Arthur, I am right wroth with
Balin, I would he were quit of the despite that he hath done to me and
to my court. Then this Lanceor went to his hostry to make him ready. In
the meanwhile came Merlin unto the court of king Arthur, and there was
told him the adventure of the sword, and the death of the Lady of the
lake. Now shall I say you, said Merlin, this same damsel that here
standeth, that brought the sword unto your court, I shall tell you the
cause of her coming,--she was the falsest damsel that liveth. Say not
so, said they. She hath a brother, a passing good knight of prowess and
a full true man, and this damsel loved another knight that held her to
paramour, and this good knight her brother met with the knight that
held her to paramour, and slew him by force of his hands. When this
false damsel understood this she went to the lady Lile of Avelion, and
besought her of help, to be avenged on her own brother. And so this
lady Lile of Avelion took her this sword, that she brought with her,
and told there should no man pull it out of the sheath but if he be one
of the best knights of this realm, and he should be hardy and full of
prowess, and with that sword he should slay her brother. This was the
cause that the damsel came into this court. I know it as well as ye.
Would she had not come into this court, but she came never in
fellowship of worship to do good, but alway great harm. And that knight
that hath achieved the sword shall be destroyed by that sword, for the
which will be great damage, for there liveth not a knight of more
prowess than he is, and he shall do unto you, my lord Arthur, great
honour and kindness, and it is great pity he shall not endure but a
while, for of his strength and hardiness I know not his match living.


CHAPTER V.
----------

_How Balin was pursued by Sir Lanceor, knight of Ireland, and how he
justed and slew him._

So the knight of Ireland armed him at all points, and dressed his
shield on his shoulder, and mounted upon horseback, and took his spear
in his hand, and rode after a great pace as much as his horse might go,
and within a little space on a mountain he had a sight of Balin, and
with a loud voice he cried, Abide knight, for ye shall abide whether ye
will or nill, and the shield that is tofore you shall not help. When
Balin heard the noise he turned his horse fiercely, and said, Fair
knight what will ye with me, will ye just with me? Yea, said the Irish
knight, therefore come I after you. Peradventure, said Balin, it had
been better to have holden you at home, for many a man weneth to put
his enemy to a rebuke, and oft it falleth to himself. Of what court be
ye sent from? said Balin. I am come from the court of king Arthur, said
the knight of Ireland, that come hither for to revenge the despite ye
did this day to king Arthur and to his court. Well, said Balin, I see
well I must have ado with you, that me forthinketh for to grieve king
Arthur, or any of his court; and your quarrel is full simple, said
Balin, unto me, for the lady that is dead did me great damage, and else
would I have been loth as any knight that liveth for to slay a lady.
Make you ready, said the knight Lanceor, and dress you unto me, for
that one shall abide in the field. Then they took their spears, and
came together as much as their horses might drive, and the Irish knight
smote Balin on the shield, that all went shivers of his spear, and
Balin hit him through the shield, and the hauberk perished, and so
pierced through his body and the horse croup, and anon turned his horse
fiercely and drew out his sword, and wist not that he had slain him,
and then he saw him lie as a dead corpse.


CHAPTER VI.
-----------

_How a damsel, which was love to Lanceor, slew herself for love; and
how Balin met with his brother Balan._

Then he looked by him, and was ware of a damsel that came riding full
fast as the horse might ride, on a fair palfrey. And when she espied
that Lanceor was slain she made sorrow out of measure, and said, O
Balin, two bodies thou hast slain and one heart, and two hearts in one
body, and two souls thou hast lost. And therewith she took the sword
from her love that lay dead, and fell to the ground in a swoon. And
when she arose she made great dole out of measure, the which sorrow
grieved Balin passingly sore, and he went unto her for to have taken
the sword out of her hand, but she held it so fast he might not take it
out of her hand unless he should have hurt her, and suddenly she set
the pommel to the ground, and rove herself through the body. When Balin
espied her deeds, he was passing heavy in his heart, and ashamed that
so fair a damsel had destroyed herself for the love of his death. Alas,
said Balin, me repenteth sore the death of this knight for the love of
this damsel, for there was much true love betwixt them both. And for
sorrow he might no longer hold him, but turned his horse and looked
towards a great forest, and there he was ware, by the arms, of his
brother Balan. And when they were met they put off their helms and
kissed together, and wept for joy and pity. Then Balan said, I little
wend to have met with you at this sudden adventure; I am right glad of
your deliverance out of your dolorous prisonment, for a man told me in
the castle of Four Stones that ye were delivered, and that man had seen
you in the court of king Arthur, and therefore I came hither into this
country, for here I supposed to find you. Anon the knight Balin told
his brother of his adventure of the sword, and of the death of the Lady
of the lake, and how king Arthur was displeased with him: Wherefore he
sent this knight after me that lieth here dead; and the death of this
damsel grieveth me sore. So doth it me, said Balan, but ye must take
the adventure that God will ordain you. Truly, said Balin, I am right
heavy that my lord Arthur is displeased with me, for he is the most
worshipful knight that reigneth now on earth, and his love I will get
or else I will put my life in adventure; for the king Ryons lieth at a
siege at the castle Terrabil, and thither will we draw in all haste, to
prove our worship and prowess upon him. I will well, said Balan, that
we do, and we will help each other as brethren ought to do.


CHAPTER VII.
------------

_How a dwarf reproved Balin for the death of Lanceor, and how king Mark
of Cornwall found them, and made a tomb over them._

Now go we hence, said Balin, and well be we met. The meanwhile as they
talked there came a dwarf from the city of Camelot on horseback, as
much as he might, and found the dead bodies, wherefore he made great
dole, and pulled out his hair for sorrow, and said, Which of you
knights have done this deed? Whereby askest thou it, said Balan. For I
would wit it, said the dwarf. It was I, said Balin, that slew this
knight in my defence, for hither came he to chase me, and either I must
slay him or he me; and this damsel slew herself for his love, which
repenteth me, and for her sake I shall owe all women the better love.
Alas, said the dwarf, thou hast done great damage unto thyself, for
this knight that is here dead was one of the most valiantest men that
lived, and trust well, Balin, the kin of this knight will chase you
through the world till they have slain you. As for that, said Balin, I
fear not greatly, but I am right heavy that I have displeased my lord
king Arthur for the death of this knight. So as they talked together
there came a king of Cornwall riding, the which hight king Mark. And
when he saw these two bodies dead, and understood how they were dead by
the two knights above said, then made the king great sorrow for the
true love that was betwixt them, and said, I will not depart till I
have on this earth made a tomb. And there he pight his pavilions, and
sought through all the country to find a tomb, and in a church they
found one was fair and rich, and then the king let put them both in the
earth, and put the tomb upon them, and wrote the names of them both on
the tomb:--How here lieth Lanceor the king's son of Ireland that at his
own request was slain by the hands of Balin, and how his lady Colombe
slew herself with her love's sword for dole and sorrow.


CHAPTER VIII.
-------------

_How Merlin prophesied that two the best knights of the world should
fight there, which were Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram._

The meanwhile as this was adoing, in came Merlin to king Mark, and
seeing all his doing said, Here shall be in this same place the
greatest battle betwixt two knights that was or ever shall be, and the
truest lovers, and yet none of them shall slay other. And there Merlin
wrote their names upon the tomb with letters of gold that should fight
in that place, whose names were Launcelot de Lake, and Tristram. Thou
art a marvellous man, said king Mark unto Merlin, that speakest of such
marvels, thou art a rude man and an unlikely to tell of such deeds;
what is thy name? said king Mark. At this time, said Merlin, I will not
tell, but at that time when Sir Tristram is taken with his sovereign
lady, then ye shall hear and know my name, and at that time ye shall
hear tidings that shall not please you. Then said Merlin to Balin, Thou
hast done thyself great hurt, because thou savedst not this lady that
slew herself, that might have saved her and thou wouldest. By the faith
of my body, said Balin, I might not save her, for she slew herself
suddenly. Me repenteth, said Merlin, because of the death of that lady
thou shalt strike a stroke the most dolorous that ever man struck,
except the stroke of our Lord, for thou shalt hurt the truest knight
and the man of most worship that now liveth, and through that stroke
three kingdoms shall be in great poverty, misery, and wretchedness,
twelve year, and the knight shall not be whole of that wound many
years. Then Merlin took his leave of Balin. And Balin said, If I wist
it were sooth that ye say, I should do such a perilous deed as that I
would slay myself to make thee a liar. Therewith Merlin vanished away
suddenly. And then Balin and his brother took their leave of king Mark.
First, said the king, tell me your name. Sir, said Balan, ye may see he
beareth two swords, thereby ye may call him the knight with the two
swords. And so departed king Mark unto Camelot to king Arthur, and
Balin took the way to king Ryons: and as they rode together they met
with Merlin disguised, but they knew him not. Whither ride you? said
Merlin. We have little to do, said the two knights, to tell thee: But
what is thy name? said Balin. At this time, said Merlin, I will not
tell it thee. It is evil seen, said the two knights, that thou art a
true man that thou wilt not tell thy name. As for that, said Merlin, be
it as it be may, I can tell you wherefore ye ride this way, for to meet
king Ryons, but it will not avail you without ye have my counsel. Ah,
said Balin, ye are Merlin: we will be ruled by your counsel. Come on,
said Merlin, ye shall have great worship, and look that ye do knightly,
for ye shall have great need. As for that, said Balin, dread you not,
we will do what we may.


CHAPTER IX.
-----------

_How Balin and his brother by the counsel of Merlin took king Ryons,
and brought him to king Arthur._

Then Merlin lodged them in a wood among leaves beside the highway, and
took off the bridles of their horses and put them to grass, and laid
them down to rest them till it was nigh midnight. Then Merlin bad them
rise and make them ready, for the king was nigh them, that was stolen
away from his host with a threescore horses of his best knights, and
twenty of them rode tofore, to warn the lady De Vance that the king was
coming. Which is the king? said Balin. Abide, said Merlin, here in a
straight way ye shall meet with him; and therewith he shewed Balin and
his brother where he rode. Anon Balin and his brother met with the
king, and smote him down, and wounded him fiercely, and laid him to the
ground, and there they slew on the right hand and the left hand, and
slew more than forty of his men; and the remnant fled. Then went they
again to king Ryons, and would have slain him had he not yielded him
unto their grace. Then said he thus: Knights full of prowess, slay me
not, for by my life ye may win, and by my death ye shall win nothing.
Then said these two knights, Ye say sooth and truth; and so laid him on
an horse-litter. With that Merlin was vanished, and came to king
Arthur, aforehand, and told him how his most enemy was taken and
discomfited. By whom? said king Arthur. By two knights, said Merlin,
that would please your lordship, and to-morrow ye shall know what
knights they are. Anon after came the knight with the two swords, and
Balan his brother, and brought with them king Ryons of North Wales, and
there delivered him to the porters, and charged them with him; and so
they two returned again in the dawning of the day. King Arthur came
then to king Ryons and said, Sir king ye are welcome: by what adventure
come ye hither? Sir, said king Ryons, I came hither by an hard
adventure. Who won you? said king Arthur. Sir, said the king, the
knight with the two swords and his brother, which are two marvellous
knights of prowess. I know them not, said Arthur, but much I am
beholden to them. Ah, said Merlin, I shall tell you, it is Balin that
achieved the sword, and his brother Balan, a good knight, there liveth
not a better of prowess, and of worthiness; and it shall be the
greatest dole of him that ever I knew of knight, for he shall not long
endure. Alas, said king Arthur, that is great pity, for I am much
beholden unto him, and I have ill deserved it unto him for his
kindness. Nay, said Merlin, he shall do much more for you, and that
shall ye know in haste. But, Sir, are ye purveyed? said Merlin; for
to-morn the host of Nero, king Ryons's brother, will set on you or noon
with a great host, and therefore make you ready, for I will depart from
you.


CHAPTER X.
----------

_How king Arthur had a battle against Nero and king Lot of Orkney, and
how king Lot was deceived by Merlin, and how twelve kings were slain._

Then king Arthur made ready his host in ten battles, and Nero was ready
in the field afore the castle Terrabil with a great host, for he had
ten battles, with many more people than Arthur had. Then Nero had the
vaward with the most party of his people: and Merlin came to king Lot
of the Isle of Orkney, and held him with a tale of prophecy till Nero
and his people were destroyed. And there Sir Kay the seneschal did
passingly well, that the days of his life the worship went never from
him. And Sir Hervis de Revel did marvellous deeds with king Arthur, and
king Arthur slew that day twenty knights and maimed forty. At that time
came in the knight with the two swords, and his brother Balan, but they
two did so marvellously that the king and all the knights marvelled of
them, and all they that beheld them said they were sent from heaven as
angels, or devils from hell: and king Arthur said himself they were the
best knights that ever he saw, for they gave such strokes that all men
had wonder of them. In the meanwhile came one to king Lot, and told him
while he tarried there Nero was destroyed and slain with all his
people. Alas, said king Lot, I am ashamed, for by my default there is
many a worshipful man slain, for and we had been together there had
been none host under the heaven that had been able for to have matched
with us: this deceiver with his prophecy hath mocked me. All that did
Merlin, for he knew well that if king Lot had been with his body there
at the first battle, king Arthur had been slain and all his people
destroyed. And well Merlin knew that one of the kings should be dead
that day; and loth was Merlin that any of them both should be slain,
but of the twain he had lever king Lot had been slain than king Arthur.

Now what is best to do? said king Lot of Orkney, whether is me better
to treat with king Arthur or to fight, for the greater part of our
people are slain and destroyed. Sir, said a knight, set on Arthur, for
they are weary and for-foughten, and we be fresh. As for me, said king
Lot, I would that every knight would do his part as I would do mine.
And then they advanced banners and smote together, and all to-shivered
their spears; and Arthur's knights, with the help of the knight with
the two swords and his brother Balan, put king Lot and his host to the
worse. But alway king Lot held him in the foremost front, and did
marvellous deeds of arms, for all his host was borne up by his hands,
for he abode all knights. Alas, he might not endure, the which was
great pity, that so worthy a knight as he was should be overmatched,
that of late time afore had been a knight of king Arthur's, and wedded
the sister of king Arthur, and for the wrong king Arthur did him
therefore king Lot held against Arthur. So there was a knight that was
called the knight with the strange beast, and at that time his right
name was called Pellinore, the which was a good man of prowess, and he
smote a mighty stroke at king Lot as he fought with all his enemies,
and he failed of his stroke, and he smote the horse's neck, that he
fell to the ground with king Lot; and therewith anon Sir Pellinore
smote him a great stroke through the helm and head unto the brows. And
then all the host of Orkney fled for the death of king Lot; and there
were slain many mothers' sons. But king Pellinore bare the blame of the
death of king Lot, wherefore Sir Gawaine revenged the death of his
father the tenth year after he was made knight, and slew king Pellinore
with his own hands. Also there were slain at that battle twelve kings
on the side of king Lot with Nero, and all were buried in the church of
Saint Stephen's, in Camelot; and the remnant of knights and of other
were buried in a great rock.


CHAPTER XI.
-----------

_Of the interment of twelve kings, and of the prophecy of Merlin, and
how Balin should give the dolorous stroke._

So at the interment came king Lot's wife Morgause, with her four sons,
Gawaine, Agravaine, Gaheris, and Gareth. Also there came thither king
Uriens, Sir Ewaine's father, and Morgan le Fay his wife, that was king
Arthur's sister. All these came to the interment. But of all these
twelve kings king Arthur let make the tomb of king Lot passing richly,
and made his tomb by his own; and then king Arthur let make twelve
images of laton and copper, and over-gilt it with gold, in the sign of
twelve kings, and each one of them held a taper of wax that burnt day
and night: and king Arthur was made in sign of a figure standing above
them with a sword drawn in his hand: and all the twelve figures had
countenance like unto men that were overcome. All this made Merlin by
his subtil craft; and there he told the king, When I am dead these
tapers shall burn no longer; and soon after the adventures of the
Sangreal shall come among you and be achieved. Also he told Arthur how
Balin the worshipful knight shall give the dolorous stroke, whereof
shall fall great vengeance. O where is Balin, and Balan, and Pellinore?
said king Arthur. As for Pellinore, said Merlin, he will meet with you
soon: and as for Balin, he will not be long from you: but the other
brother will depart; ye shall see him no more. By my faith, said
Arthur, they are two marvellous knights, and namely Balin passeth of
prowess of any knight that ever I found, for much beholden am I unto
him; would that he would abide with me. Sir, said Merlin, look ye keep
well the scabbard of Excalibur, for ye shall lose no blood while ye
have the scabbard upon you, though ye have as many wounds upon you as
ye may have. So after, for great trust Arthur betook the scabbard to
Morgan le Fay his sister, and she loved another knight better than her
husband king Uriens or king Arthur, and she would have had Arthur her
brother slain, and therefore she let make another scabbard like it by
enchantment, and gave the scabbard of Excalibur to her love. And the
knight's name was called Accolon, that after had near slain king
Arthur. After this Merlin told unto king Arthur of the prophecy that
there should be a great battle beside Salisbury, and that Mordred his
sister's son should be against him. Also he told him that Basdemegus
was his cousin, and germain unto king Uriens.


CHAPTER XII.
------------

_How a sorrowful knight came tofore king Arthur, and how Balin fetched
him, and how that knight was slain by a knight invisible._

Within a day or two king Arthur was somewhat sick, and he let pitch his
pavilion in a meadow, and there he laid him down on a pallet to sleep,
but he might have no rest. Right so he heard a great noise of an horse,
and therewith the king looked out at the porch of the pavilion, and saw
a knight coming even by him making great dole. Abide, fair sir, said
Arthur, and tell me wherefore thou makest this sorrow? Ye may little
amend me, said the knight, and so passed forth to the castle of Meliot.
Anon after there came Balin, and when he saw king Arthur he alight off
his horse, and came to the king on foot, and saluted him. By my head,
said Arthur, ye be welcome. Sir, right now came riding this way a
knight making great mourn, for what cause I cannot tell, wherefore I
would desire of you of your courtesy and of your gentleness to fetch
again that knight either by force or else by his good-will. I will do
more for your lordship than that, said Balin: and so he rode more than
a pace, and found the knight with a damsel in a forest, and said, Sir
knight, ye must come with me unto king Arthur, for to tell him of your
sorrow. That will I not, said the knight, for it will scathe me
greatly, and do you none avail. Sir, said Balin, I pray you make you
ready, for ye must go with me, or else I must fight with you and bring
you by force, and that were me loth to do. Will ye be my warrant, said
the knight, and I go with you? Yea, said Balin, or else I will die
therefore. And so he made him ready to go with Balin, and left the
damsel still. And as they were even afore king Arthur's pavilion there
came one invisible, and smote this knight that went with Balin
throughout the body with a spear. Alas, said the knight, I am slain
under your conduct, with a knight called Garlon: therefore take my
horse, that is better than your's, and ride to the damsel, and follow
the quest that I was in as she will lead you, and revenge my death when
ye may. That shall I do, said Balin, and that I make a vow unto
knighthood. And so he departed from this knight with great sorrow. So
king Arthur let bury this knight richly, and made a mention on his tomb
how there was slain Herlews le Berbeus, and by whom the treachery was
done,--the knight Garlon. But ever the damsel bare the truncheon of the
spear with her that Sir Herlews was slain withal.


CHAPTER XIII.
-------------

_How Balin and the damsel met with a knight which was in likewise
slain, and how the damsel bled for the custom of a castle._

So Balin and the damsel rode into a forest, and there met with a knight
that had been on hunting, and that knight asked Balin for what cause he
made so great sorrow. Me list not to tell you, said Balin. Now, said
the knight, and I were armed as ye be I would fight with you. That
should little need, said Balin; I am not afeard to tell you; and told
him all the cause, how it was. Ah, said the knight, is this all: here I
ensure you by the faith of my body never to depart from you while my
life lasteth. And so they went to the hostry and armed them, and so
rode forth with Balin. And as they came by an hermitage even by a
churchyard, there came the knight Garlon invisible, and smote this
knight, Perin de Mountbeliard, through the body with a spear. Alas,
said the knight, I am slain by this traitor knight that rideth
invisible. Alas, said Balin, it is not the first despite that he hath
done me. And there the hermit and Balin buried the knight under a rich
stone, and a tomb royal. And on the morn they found letters of gold
written, how Sir Gawaine shall revenge his father's death, king Lot, on
the king Pellinore. Anon after this Balin and the damsel rode till they
came to a castle, and there Balin alighted, and he and the damsel wend
to go into the castle. And anon as Balin came within the castle gate
the portcullis fell down at his back, and there fell many men about the
damsel, and would have slain her. When Balin saw that, he was sore
grieved, for he might not help the damsel. And then he went up into the
tower, and lept over the walls into the ditch, and hurt him not; and
anon he pulled out his sword, and would have foughten with them. And
they all said nay, they would not fight with him, for they did nothing
but the old custom of the castle, and told him how their lady was sick,
and had lain many years, and she might not be whole, but if she had a
dish of silver full of blood of a maid and a king's daughter; and
therefore the custom of this castle is that there shall no damsel pass
this way, but that she shall bleed of her blood in a silver dish full.
Well, said Balin, she shall bleed as much as she may bleed, but I will
not lose the life of her while my life lasteth. And so Balin made her
to bleed by her good-will, but her blood helped not the lady. And so he
and she rested there all night, and had there right good cheer, and on
the morn they passed on their ways. And as it telleth after in the
Sangreal, that Sir Percivale's sister helped that lady with her blood,
whereof she died.


CHAPTER XIV.
------------

_How Balin met with that knight named Garlon at a feast, and there he
slew him, to have his blood to heal therewith the son of his host._

Then they rode three or four days and never met with adventure, and by
hap they were lodged with a gentleman that was a rich man and well at
ease. And as they sat at their supper, Balin heard one complain
grievously by him in a chair. What is this noise? said Balin. Forsooth,
said his host, I will tell you. I was but late at a justing, and there
I justed with a knight that is brother unto king Pellam, and twice
smote I him down; and then he promised to quit me on my best friend,
and so he wounded my son, that cannot be whole till I have of that
knight's blood, and he rideth alway invisible, but I know not his name.
Ah, said Balin, I know that knight, his name is Garlon, he hath slain
two knights of mine in the same manner, therefore I had rather meet
with that knight than all the gold in this realm, for the despite he
hath done me. Well, said his host, I shall tell you, king Pellam of
Listeneise hath made cry in all this country a great feast that shall
be within these twenty days, and no knight may come there but if he
bring his wife with him, or his love; and that knight, your enemy and
mine, ye shall see that day. Then I promise you, said Balin, part of
his blood to heal your son withal. We will be forward to-morrow, said
his host. So on the morn they rode all three toward Pellam, and they
had fifteen days' journey or they came thither; and that same day began
the great feast. And so they alight and stabled their horses, and went
into the castle; but Balin's host might not be let in because he had no
lady. Then Balin was well received, and brought unto a chamber and
unarmed him, and they brought him robes to his pleasure, and would have
had Balin leave his sword behind him. Nay, said Balin, that do I not,
for it is the custom of my country a knight alway to keep his weapon
with him, and that custom will I keep, or else I will depart as I came.
Then they gave him leave to wear his sword, and so he went unto the
castle, and was set among knights of worship, and his lady afore him.
Soon Balin asked a knight, Is there not a knight in this court whose
name is Garlon? Yonder he goeth, said a knight, he with the black face;
he is the marvellest knight that is now living, for he destroyeth many
good knights, for he goeth invisible. Ah, well, said Balin, is that he?
Then Balin advised him long:--If I slay him here I shall not escape,
and if I leave him now peradventure I shall never meet with him again
at such a good time, and much harm he will do and he live. Therewith
this Garlon espied that this Balin beheld him, and then he came and
smote Balin on the face with the back of his hand, and said, Knight,
why beholdest thou me so? for shame, therefore, eat thy meat, and do
that thou came for. Thou sayest sooth, said Balin, this is not the
first despite that thou hast done me, and therefore I will do that I
came for; and rose up fiercely, and clave his head to the shoulders.
Give me the truncheon, said Balin to his lady, wherewith he slew your
knight. Anon she gave it him, for alway she bare the truncheon with
her; and therewith Balin smote him through the body, and said openly,
With that truncheon thou hast slain a good knight, and now it sticketh
in thy body. And then Balin called to him his host, saying, Now may ye
fetch blood enough to heal your son withal.


CHAPTER XV.
-----------

_How Balin fought with king Pellam, and how his sword brake, and how he
gat a spear wherewith he smote the dolorous stroke._

Anon all the knights arose from the table for to set on Balin. And king
Pellam himself arose up fiercely, and said, Knight, hast thou slain my
brother? thou shalt die therefore or thou depart. Well, said Balin, do
it yourself. Yes, said king Pellam, there shall no man have ado with
thee but myself, for the love of my brother. Then king Pellam caught in
his hand a grim weapon and smote eagerly at Balin, but Balin put the
sword betwixt his head and the stroke, and therewith his sword burst in
sunder. And when Balin was weaponless he ran into a chamber for to seek
some weapon, and so from chamber to chamber, and no weapon he could
find, and alway king Pellam after him. And at the last he entered into
a chamber that was marvellously well dight and richly, and a bed
arrayed with cloth of gold, the richest that might be thought, and one
lying therein, and thereby stood a table of clean gold, with four
pillars of silver that bare up the table, and upon the table stood a
marvellous spear, strangely wrought. And when Balin saw that spear he
gat it in his hand, and turned him to king Pellam, and smote him
passingly sore with that spear, that king Pellam fell down in a swoon,
and therewith the castle roof and walls brake and fell to the earth,
and Balin fell down so that he might not stir foot nor hand. And so the
most part of the castle that was fallen down through that dolorous
stroke lay upon Pellam and Balin three days.


CHAPTER XVI.
------------

_How Balin was delivered by Merlin, and saved a knight that would have
slain himself for love._

Then Merlin came thither and took up Balin, and gat him a good horse,
for his was dead, and bade him ride out of that country. I would have
my damsel, said Balin. Lo, said Merlin, where she lieth dead. And king
Pellam lay so many years sore wounded, and might never be whole, till
Galahad, the haut prince, healed him in the quest of the Sangreal; for
in that place was part of the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
Joseph of Arimathea brought into this land, and there himself lay in
that rich bed. And that was the same spear that Longius smote our Lord
to the heart; and king Pellam was nigh of Joseph's kin, and that was
the most worshipful man that lived in those days, and great pity it was
of his hurt, for that stroke turned to great dole, trouble, and grief.

Then departed Balin from Merlin, and said, In this world we meet never
no more. So he rode forth through the fair countries and cities, and
found the people dead, slain on every side. And all that were alive
cried, O Balin, thou hast caused great damage in these countries; for
the dolorous stroke thou gavest unto king Pellam three countries are
destroyed, and doubt not but the vengeance will fall on thee at the
last. When Balin was past those countries he was passing glad. So he
rode eight days or he met with adventure. And at the last he came into
a fair forest in a valley, and was ware of a tower, and there beside he
saw a great horse of war tied to a tree, and there beside sat a fair
knight on the ground and made great mourning; and he was a likely man
and a well made. Balin said, God save you, why be ye so heavy? tell me,
and I will amend it and I may to my power. Sir knight, said he again,
thou doest me great grief, for I was in merry thoughts, and now thou
puttest me to more pain. Balin went a little from him, and looked on
his horse; then heard Balin him say thus: Ah, fair lady, why have ye
broken my promise, for thou promisedst me to meet me here by noon, and
I may curse thee that ever ye gave me this sword, for with this sword I
slay myself,--and pulled it out; and therewith Balin start unto him,
and took him by the hand. Let go my hand, said the knight, or else I
shall slay thee. That shall not need, said Balin, for I shall promise
you my help to get you your lady, and ye will tell me where she is.
What is your name? said the knight. My name is Balin le Savage. Ah,
sir, I know you well enough; ye are the knight with the two swords, and
the man of most prowess of your hands living. What is your name? said
Balin. My name is Garnish of the Mount, a poor man's son, but by my
prowess and hardiness a duke hath made me knight, and gave me lands;
his name is duke Hermel, and his daughter is she that I love, and she
me as I deemed. How far is she hence? said Balin. But six mile, said
the knight. Now ride we hence, said these two knights. So they rode
more than a pace till they came to a fair castle, well walled and
ditched. I will into the castle, said Balin, and look if she be there.
So he went in, and searched from chamber to chamber, and found her bed,
but she was not there; then Balin looked into a fair little garden, and
under a laurel tree he saw her lie upon a quilt of green samite, and a
knight with her, and under their heads grass and herbs. When Balin saw
her with the foulest knight that ever he saw, and she a fair lady, then
Balin went through all the chambers again, and told the knight how he
found her, as she had slept fast, and so brought him in the place where
she lay fast sleeping.


CHAPTER XVII.
-------------

_How that knight slew his love and a knight with her, and after how he
slew himself with his own sword, and how Balin rode toward a castle
where he lost his life._

And when Garnish beheld her so lying, for pure sorrow his mouth and
nose burst out on bleeding, and with his sword he smote off both their
heads, and then he made sorrow out of measure and said, Oh Balin, much
sorrow hast thou brought unto me, for hadst thou not shewn me that
sight I should have passed my sorrow. Forsooth, said Balin, I did it to
this intent that it should better thy courage, and that ye might see
and know her falsehood, and to cause you to leave love of such a lady:
truly I did none other but as I would ye did to me. Alas! said Garnish,
now is my sorrow double that I may not endure: now have I slain that I
most loved in all my life. And therewith suddenly he rove himself on
his own sword unto the hilts. When Balin saw that, he dressed him
thenceward, lest folks would say he had slain them, and so he rode
forth, and within three days he came by a cross, and thereon were
letters of gold written that said, It is not for any knight alone to
ride toward this castle. Then saw he an old hoar gentleman coming
toward him that said, Balin le Savage, thou passest thy bounds to come
this way, therefore turn again and it will avail thee. And he vanished
away anon; and so he heard an horn blow as it had been the death of a
beast. That blast, said Balin, is blown for me, for I am the prize, yet
am I not dead. Anon withal he saw an hundred ladies and many knights,
that welcomed him with fair semblance, and made him passing good cheer
unto his sight, and led him into the castle, and there was dancing and
minstrelsy, and all manner of joy. Then the chief lady of the castle
said, Knight with the two swords, ye must have ado with a knight hereby
that keepeth an island, for there may no man pass this way but he must
just or he pass. That is an unhappy custom, said Balin, that a knight
may not pass this way but if he just. Ye shall not have ado but with
one knight, said the lady. Well, said Balin, since I shall, thereto am
I ready, but travelling men are oft weary, and their horses also; but
though my horse be weary my heart is not weary. I would be fain there
my death should be. Sir, said a knight to Balin, me thinketh your
shield is not good, I will lend you a bigger: therefore I pray you: and
so he took the shield that was unknown and left his own, and so rode
unto the island, and put him and his horse in a great boat, and when he
came on the other side he met with a damsel, and she said, O knight
Balin, why have ye left your own shield? alas! ye have put your self in
great danger, for by your shield ye should have been known: it is great
pity of you as ever was of knight, for of thy prowess and hardiness
thou hast no fellow living. Me repenteth, said Balin, that ever I came
within this country, but I may not turn now again for shame, and what
adventure shall fall to me, be it life or death, I will take the
adventure that shall come to me. And then he looked on his armour, and
understood he was well armed, and therewith blessed him, and mounted
upon his horse.


CHAPTER XVIII.
--------------

_How Balin met with his brother Balan, and how each of them slew other
unknown, till they were wounded to death._

Then afore him he saw come riding out of a castle a knight, and his
horse trapped all red, and himself in the same colour. When this knight
in the red beheld Balin, him thought it should be his brother Balin
because of his two swords, but because he knew not his shield, he
deemed it was not he. And so they aventred their spears, and came
marvellously fast together, and they smote each other in the shields,
but their spears and their course were so big that it bare down horse
and man, that they lay both in a swoon. But Balin was bruised sore with
the fall of his horse, for he was weary of travel. And Balan was the
first that rose on foot and drew his sword, and went toward Balin, and
he arose and went against him, but Balan smote Balin first, and he put
up his shield, and smote him through the shield and cleft his helm.
Then Balin smote him again with that unhappy sword, and well nigh had
felled his brother Balan, and so they fought there together till their
breaths failed. Then Balin looked up to the castle, and saw the towers
stand full of ladies. So they went to battle again, and wounded each
other dolefully, and then they breathed oft-times, and so went unto
battle, that all the place there as they fought was blood red. And at
that time there was none of them both but they had either smitten other
seven great wounds, so that the least of them might have been the death
of the mightiest giant in this world. Then they went to battle again so
marvellously that doubt it was to hear of that battle for the great
bloodshedding, and their hauberks unnailed, that naked they were on
every side. At the last Balan, the younger brother, withdrew him a
little and laid him down. Then said Balin le Savage, What knight art
thou? for or now I found never no knight that matched me. My name is,
said he, Balan, brother to the good knight Balin. Alas! said Balin,
that ever I should see this day. And therewith he fell backward in a
swoon. Then Balan went on all four feet and hands, and put off the helm
of his brother, and might not know him by the visage it was so full
hewen and bled; but when he awoke he said, O Balan, my brother, thou
hast slain me and I thee, wherefore all the wide world shall speak of
us both. Alas! said Balan, that ever I saw this day, that through
mishap I might not know you, for I espied well your two swords, but
because ye had another shield I deemed you had been another knight.
Alas! said Balin, all that made an unhappy knight in the castle, for he
caused me to leave mine own shield to our both's destruction, and if I
might live I would destroy that castle for ill customs. That were well
done, said Balan, for I had never grace to depart from them since that
I came hither, for here it happed me to slay a knight that kept this
island, and since might I never depart, and no more should ye brother,
and ye might have slain me as ye have, and escaped yourself with the
life. Right so came the lady of the tower with four knights and six
ladies and six yeomen unto them, and there she heard how they made
their moan either to other, and said, We came both out of one womb, and
so shall we lye both in one pit. So Balan prayed the lady of her
gentleness, for his true service that she would bury them both in that
same place there the battle was done. And she granted them with weeping
it should be done richly in the best manner. Now will ye send for a
priest, that we may receive our sacrament and receive the blessed body
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, said the lady, it shall be done. And so
she sent for a priest and gave them their rites. Now, said Balin, when
we are buried in one tomb, and the mention made over us how two
brethren slew each other, there will never good knight nor good man see
our tomb but they will pray for our souls. And so all the ladies and
gentlewomen wept for pity. Then, anon Balan died, but Balin died not
till the midnight after, and so were they buried both, and the lady let
make a mention of Balan how he was there slain by his brother's hands,
but she knew not Balin's name.


CHAPTER XIX.
------------

_How Merlin buried them both in one tomb, and of Balin's sword._

In the morn came Merlin and let write Balin's name upon the tomb, with
letters of gold, That here lieth Balin le Savage, that was the knight
with the two swords, and he that smote the dolorous stroke. Also Merlin
let make there a bed, that there should never man lye therein but he
went out of his wit, yet Launcelot de Lake fordid that bed through his
nobleness. And anon after Balin was dead, Merlin took his sword and
took off the pommel, and set on another pommel. So Merlin bad a knight
that stood afore him to handle that sword, and he assayed, and he might
not handle it. Then Merlin laughed. Why laugh ye? said the knight. This
is the cause, said Merlin: there shall never man handle this sword but
the best knight of the world, and that shall be Sir Launcelot, or else
Galahad his son, and Launcelot with this sword shall slay the man that
in the world he loved best, that shall be Sir Gawaine. All this he let
write in the pommel of the sword. Then Merlin let make a bridge of iron
and of steel into that island, and it was but half a foot broad, and
there shall never man pass that bridge, nor have hardiness to go over,
but if he were a passing good man and a good knight without treachery
or villainy. Also the scabbard of Balin's sword Merlin left it on this
side the island that Galahad should find it. Also Merlin let make by
his subtilty that Balin's sword was put in a marble stone standing
upright as great as a millstone, and the stone hoved always above the
water, and did many years, and so by adventure it swam down the stream
to the city of Camelot, that is in English Winchester. And that same
day Galahad the haut prince came with king Arthur, and so Galahad
brought with him the scabbard, and achieved the sword that was there in
the marble stone hoving upon the water. And on Whitsunday he achieved
the sword, as it is rehearsed in the book of the Sangreal. Soon after
this was done Merlin came to king Arthur and told him of the dolorous
stroke that Balin gave to king Pellam, and how Balin and Balan fought
together the most marvellous battle that ever was heard of, and how
they were buried both in one tomb. Alas! said king Arthur, this is the
greatest pity that ever I heard tell of two knights, for in the world I
know not such two knights. Thus endeth the tale of Balin and Balan, two
brethren born in Northumberland, good knights.


End of the Second Book.
=======================
