The Seventh Book.
=================

CHAPTER I.
----------

_How Beaumains came to king Arthur's court and demanded three petitions
of king Arthur._

When Arthur held his Round Table most fully, it fortuned that he
commanded that the high feast of Pentecost should be holden at a city
and a castle, the which in those days was called Kink-Kenadon, upon the
sands that marched nigh Wales. So ever the king had a custom that at
the feast of Pentecost, in especial afore other feasts in the year, he
would not go that day to meat until he had heard or seen of a great
marvel. And for that custom all manner of strange adventures came
before Arthur as at that feast before all other feasts. And so Sir
Gawaine, a little tofore noon of the day of Pentecost, espied at a
window three men upon horseback, and a dwarf on foot. And so the three
men alight and the dwarf kept their horses, and one of the three men
was higher than the other twain by a foot and a half. Then Sir Gawaine
went unto the king and said, Sir, go to your meat, for here at the hand
come strange adventures. So Arthur went unto his meat with many other
kings. And there were all the knights of the Round Table, save those
that were prisoners or slain at a recounter. Then at the high feast
evermore they should be fulfilled the whole number of an hundred and
fifty, for then was the Round Table fully complished. Right so came
into the hall two men well beseen and richly, and upon their shoulders
there leaned the goodliest young man and the fairest that ever they all
saw, and he was large and long and broad in the shoulders, and well
visaged, and the fairest and the largest handed that ever man saw, but
he fared as though he might not go nor bear himself, but if he leaned
upon their shoulders. Anon as Arthur saw him there was made peace and
room, and right so they went with him unto the high dais, without
saying of any words. Then this much young man pulled him aback, and
easily stretched up straight, saying, King Arthur, God you bless, and
all your fair fellowship, and in especial the fellowship of the Table
Round. And for this cause I am come hither, to pray you and require you
to give me three gifts, and they shall not be unreasonably asked, but
that ye may worshipfully and honourably grant them me, and to you no
great hurt nor loss. And the first done and gift I will ask now, and
the other two gifts I will ask this day twelvemonth wheresoever ye hold
your high feast. Now ask, said Arthur, and ye shall have your asking.
Now sir, this is my petition for this feast, that ye will give me meat
and drink sufficiently for this twelvemonth, and at that day I will ask
mine other two gifts. My fair son, said Arthur, ask better, I counsel
thee, for this is but a simple asking, for my heart giveth me to thee
greatly that thou art come of men of worship, and greatly my conceit
faileth me but thou shalt prove a man of right great worship. Sir, said
he, thereof be as it may, I have asked that I will ask. Well, said the
king, ye shall have meat and drink enough, I never defended that none,
neither my friend nor my foe. But what is thy name I would wit? I
cannot tell you, said he. That is marvel, said the king, that thou
knowest not thy name, and thou art the goodliest young man that ever I
saw. Then the king betook him to Sir Kay, the steward, and charged him
that he should give him of all manner of meats and drinks of the best,
and also that he had all manner of finding as though he were a lord's
son. That shall little need, said Sir Kay, to do such cost upon him;
for I dare undertake he is a villain born, and never will make man, for
and he had come of gentlemen he would have asked of you horse and
armour, but such as he is, so he asketh. And since he hath no name, I
shall give him a name that shall be Beaumains, that is Fair-hands, and
into the kitchen I shall bring him, and there he shall have fat browis
every day, that he shall be as fat by the twelvemonth's end as a pork
hog. Right so the two men departed, and beleft him to Sir Kay, that
scorned him and mocked him.


CHAPTER II.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot and Sir Gawaine were wroth because Sir Kay mocked
Beaumains, and of a damsel which desired a knight for to fight for a
lady._

Thereat was Sir Gawaine wroth, and in especial Sir Launcelot bad Sir
Kay leave his mocking, for I dare lay my head he shall prove a man of
great worship. Let be, said Sir Kay, it may not be, by no reason, for
as he is so hath he asked. Beware, said Sir Launcelot, so ye gave the
good knight Brewnor, Sir Dinadan's brother, a name, and ye called him
La Cote Male Taile, and that turned you to anger afterward. As for
that, said Sir Kay, this shall never prove none such; for Sir Brewnor
desired ever worship, and this desireth bread and drink, and broth;
upon pain of my life he was fostered up in some abbey, and, howsoever
it was, they failed meat and drink, and so hither he is come for his
sustenance. And so Sir Kay bad get him a place and sit down to meat, so
Beaumains went to the hall door, and set him down among boys and lads,
and there he eat sadly. And then Sir Launcelot after meat bad him come
to his chamber, and there he should have meat and drink enough. And so
did Sir Gawaine: but he refused them all; he would do none other but as
Sir Kay commanded him, for no proffer. But as touching Sir Gawaine, he
had reason to proffer him lodging, meat, and drink, for that proffer
came of his blood, for he was nearer kin to him than he wist. But that
as Sir Launcelot did was of his great gentleness and courtesy. So thus
he was put into the kitchen, and lay nightly as the boys of the kitchen
did. And so he endured all that twelvemonth, and never displeased man
nor child, but always he was meek and mild. But ever when that he saw
any justing of knights, that would he see and he might. And ever Sir
Launcelot would give him gold to spend, and clothes, and so did Sir
Gawaine. And where were any masteries done thereat would he be, and
there might none cast bar nor stone to him by two yards. Then would Sir
Kay say, How liketh you my boy of the kitchen? So it passed on till the
feast of Whitsuntide. And at that time the king held it at Carlion in
the most royalest wise that might be, like as he did yearly.

But the king would no meat eat upon the Whitsunday until he heard some
adventures. Then came there a squire to the king and said, Sir, ye may
go to your meat, for here cometh a damsel with some strange adventures.
Then was the king glad, and set him down. Right so there came a damsel
into the hall, and saluted the king, and prayed him of succour. For
whom, said the king, what is the adventure? Sir, she said, I have a
lady of great worship and renown, and she is besieged with a tyrant, so
that she may not out of her castle. And because here are called the
noblest knights of the world, I come to you to pray you of succour.
What highteth your lady, and where dwelleth she? and who is he, and
what is his name, that hath besieged her? Sir king, she said, as for my
lady's name that shall not ye know for me as at this time, but I let
you wit she is a lady of great worship, and of great lands. And as for
the tyrant that besiegeth her and destroyeth her lands, he is called
the red knight of the red lawns. I know him not, said the king. Sir,
said Sir Gawaine, I know him well, for he is one of the perilousest
knights of the world: men say that he hath seven men's strength, and
from him I escaped once full hard with my life. Fair damsel, said the
king, there be knights here would do their power to rescue your lady,
but because ye will not tell her name, nor where she dwelleth,
therefore none of my knights that be here now shall go with you by my
will. Then must I speak further, said the damsel.


CHAPTER III.
------------

_How Beaumains desired the battle, and how it was granted to him, and
how he desired to be made knight of Sir Launcelot._

With these words came before the king Beaumains, while the damsel was
there, and thus he said: Sir king, God thank you, I have been these
twelvemonth in your kitchen, and have had my full sustenance, and now I
will ask my two gifts that be behind. Ask upon my peril, said the king.
Sir, this shall be my two gifts. First, that ye will grant me to have
this adventure of the damsel, for it belongeth unto me. Thou shalt have
it, said the king, I grant it thee. Then, sir, this is the other gift,
that ye shall bid Launcelot du Lake make me knight, for of him I will
be made knight, and else of none. And when I am past, I pray you let
him ride after me, and make me knight when I require him. All this
shall be done, said the king. Fie on thee, said the damsel, shall I
have none but one that is your kitchen page. Then was she wroth, and
took her horse and departed.

And with that there came one to Beaumains, and told him that his horse
and armour was come for him, and there was the dwarf come with all
thing that him needed in the richest manner. Thereat all the court had
much marvel from whence came all that gear. So when he was armed there
was none but few so goodly a man as he was. And right so he came into
the hall and took his leave of king Arthur and Sir Gawaine and Sir
Launcelot, and prayed that he would hie after him. And so departed and
rode after the damsel.


CHAPTER IV.
-----------

_How Beaumains departed, and how he gat of Sir Kay a spear and a
shield, and how he justed and fought with Sir Launcelot._

But there went many after to behold how well he was horsed and trapped
in cloth of gold, but he had neither shield nor spear. Then Sir Kay
said all openly in the hall, I will ride after my boy in the kitchen,
to wit whether he will know me for his better. Said Sir Launcelot and
Sir Gawaine, Yet abide at home. So Sir Kay made him ready and took his
horse and his spear and rode after him. And right as Beaumains overtook
the damsel, right so came Sir Kay, and said, Beaumains, what sir know
ye not me? Then he turned his horse and knew it was Sir Kay, that had
done him all the despite as ye have heard afore. Yea, said Beaumains, I
know you for an ungentle knight of the court, and therefore beware of
me. Therewith Sir Kay put his spear in the rest, and ran straight upon
him, and Beaumains came as fast upon him with his sword in his hand;
and so he put away his spear with his sword, and with a foin thrust him
through the side, that Sir Kay fell down as he had been dead, and he
alight down and took Sir Kay's shield and his spear, and start upon his
own horse and rode his way. All that saw Sir Launcelot, and so did the
damsel. And then he bad his dwarf start upon Sir Kay's horse, and so he
did. By that Sir Launcelot was come. Then he proffered Sir Launcelot to
just, and either made them ready, and came together so fiercely that
either bare down other to the earth, and sore were they bruised. Then
Sir Launcelot arose and helped him from his horse. And then Beaumains
threw his shield from him, and proffered to fight with Sir Launcelot on
foot, and so they rushed together like boars, tracing, racing, and
foining, to the mountenance of an hour, and Sir Launcelot felt him so
big that he marvelled of his strength, for he fought more like a giant
than a knight, and that his fighting was durable and passing perilous.
For Sir Launcelot had so much ado with him that he dread himself to be
shamed, and said, Beaumains, fight not so sore, your quarrel and mine
is not so great but we may leave off. Truly, that is truth, said
Beaumains, but it doth me good to feel your might, and yet, my lord, I
shewed not the utterance.


CHAPTER V.
----------

_How Beaumains told to Sir Launcelot his name, and how he was dubbed
knight of Sir Launcelot, and after overtook the damsel._

Well, said Sir Launcelot, for I promise you by the faith of my body I
had as much to do as I might to save myself from you unshamed, and
therefore have ye no doubt of none earthly knight. Hope ye so that I
may any while stand a proved knight? said Beaumains. Yea, said
Launcelot, do ye as ye have done, and I shall be your warrant. Then, I
pray you, said Beaumains, give me the order of knighthood. Then must ye
tell me your name, said Launcelot, and of what kin ye be born. Sir, so
that ye will not discover me I shall, said Beaumains. Nay, said Sir
Launcelot, and that I promise you by the faith of my body, until it be
openly known. Then, Sir, he said, my name is Gareth, and brother unto
Sir Gawaine, of father and mother. Ah! Sir, said Launcelot, I am more
gladder of you than I was, for ever me thought ye should be of great
blood, and that ye came not to the court neither for meat nor for
drink. And then Sir Launcelot gave him the order of knighthood. And
then Sir Gareth prayed him for to depart, and let him go. So Sir
Launcelot departed from him and came to Sir Kay, and made him to be
borne home upon his shield, and so he was healed hard with the life,
and all men scorned Sir Kay, and in especial Sir Gawaine and Sir
Launcelot said it was not his part to rebuke no young man, for full
little knew he of what birth he is come, and for what cause he came to
this court. And so we leave off Sir Kay and turn we unto Beaumains.
When he had overtaken the damsel anon she said, What doest thou here?
thou stinkest all of the kitchen, thy clothes be foul of the grease and
tallow that thou gainedst in king Arthur's kitchen; weenest thou, said
she, that I allow thee for yonder knight that thou killedst? Nay truly,
for thou slewest him unhappily and cowardly, therefore turn again foul
kitchen page. I know thee well, for Sir Kay named thee Beaumains; what
art thou but a lubber and a turner of spits, and a ladle washer?
Damsel, said Beaumains, say to me what ye will, I will not go from you
whatsoever ye say, for I have undertaken to king Arthur for to achieve
your adventure, and so shall I finish it to the end, or I shall die
therefore. Fie on thee, kitchen knave, wilt thou finish mine adventure?
thou shalt anon be met withall, that thou wouldest not for all the
broth that ever thou suppedst once look him in the face. I shall assay,
said Beaumains. So thus as they rode in the wood, there came a man
flying all that ever he might. Whither wilt thou? said Beaumains. O
lord, he said, help me, for hereby in a slade are six thieves, that
have taken my lord and bound him, so I am afeard lest they will slay
him. Bring me thither, said Sir Beaumains. And so they rode together
until they came there as was the knight bound, and then he rode unto
them and struck one unto the death, and then another, and at the third
stroke he slew the third thief: and then the other three fled. And he
rode after them, and he overtook them, and then those three thieves
turned again and assailed Beaumains hard, but at the last he slew them,
and returned and unbound the knight. And the knight thanked him, and
prayed him to ride with him to his castle there a little beside, and he
should worshipfully reward him for his good deeds. Sir, said Beaumains,
I will no reward have, I was this day made knight of noble Sir
Launcelot, and therefore I will no reward have, but God reward me. And
also I must follow this damsel. And when he came nigh her, she bad him
ride from her, for thou smellest all of the kitchen; weenest thou that
I have joy of thee? for all this deed thou hast done, is but mishapped
thee; but thou shalt see a sight that shall make thee turn again, and
that lightly. Then the same knight which was rescued of the thieves
rode after that damsel, and prayed her to lodge with him all that
night. And because it was near night the damsel rode with him to his
castle, and there they had great cheer. And at supper the knight set
Sir Beaumains afore the damsel. Fie, fie, said she, sir knight, ye are
uncourteous to set a kitchen page afore me, him beseemeth better to
stick a swine than to sit afore a damsel of high parentage. Then the
knight was ashamed at her words, and took him up and set him at a side
board, and set himself afore him. And so all that night they had good
cheer and merry rest.


CHAPTER VI.
-----------

_How Sir Beaumains fought and slew two knights at a passage._

And on the morn the damsel and he took their leave and thanked the
knight, and so departed, and rode on their way until they came to a
great forest. And there was a great river and but one passage, and
there were ready two knights on the further side, to let them the
passage. What sayest thou, said the damsel, wilt thou match yonder
knights, or turn again? Nay, said Sir Beaumains, I will not turn again
and they were six more. And therewithal he rushed into the water, and
in the midst of the water either brake their spears upon other to their
hands, and then they drew their swords and smote eagerly at other. And
at the last Sir Beaumains smote the other upon the helm that his head
stonied, and therewithal he fell down in the water, and there was he
drowned. And then he spurred his horse upon the land, where the other
knight fell upon him and brake his spear, and so they drew their swords
and fought long together. At the last Sir Beaumains clave his helm and
his head down to the shoulders: and so he rode unto the damsel, and
bade her ride forth on her way. Alas, she said, that ever a kitchen
page should have that fortune to destroy such two doughty knights; thou
weenest thou hast done doughtily; that is not so, for the first knight
his horse stumbled, and there he was drowned in the water, and never it
was by thy force nor by thy might. And the last knight by mishap thou
camest behind him and mishappily thou slewest him. Damsel, said
Beaumains, ye may say what ye will, but with whomsoever I have ado
withall I trust to God to serve him or he depart, and therefore I reck
not what ye say, so that I may win your lady. Fie, fie, foul kitchen
knave, thou shalt see knights that shall abate thy boast. Fair damsel,
give me goodly language, and then my care is past, for what knights
soever they be I care not, nor I doubt them not. Also, said she, I say
it for thine avail, yet mayest thou turn again with thy worship, for
and thou follow me thou art but slain, for I see all that ever thou
dost is but by misadventure, and not by prowess of thy hands. Well,
damsel, ye may say what ye will, but wheresoever ye go I will follow
you. So this Beaumains rode with that lady till even-song time, and
ever she chid him, and would not rest. And then they came to a black
lawn, and there was a black hawthorn, and thereon hung a black banner,
and on the other side there hung a black shield, and by it stood a
black spear great and long, and a great black horse covered with silk,
and a black stone fast by.


CHAPTER VII.
------------

_How Sir Beaumains fought with the knight of the black lawns, and
fought with him till he fell down and died._

There sat a knight all armed in black harness, and his name was the
knight of the black lawn. Then the damsel, when she saw that knight,
she bade him flee down the valley, for his horse was not saddled.
Gramercy, said Beaumains, for always ye would have me a coward. With
that the black knight, when she came nigh him, spake and said, Damsel,
have ye brought this knight of king Arthur to be your champion? Nay,
fair knight, said she, this is but a kitchen knave, that was fed in
king Arthur's kitchen for alms. Why cometh he, said the knight, in such
array? it is shame that he beareth you company. Sir, I cannot be
delivered of him, said she, for with me he rideth maugre mine head;
would that ye should put him from me, or else to slay him and ye may,
for he is an unhappy knave, and unhappily he hath done this day;
through mishap I saw him slay two knights at the passage of the water,
and other deeds he did before right marvellous, and through
unhappiness. That marvelleth me, said the black knight, that any man
that is of worship will have ado with him. They know him not, said the
damsel, and because he rideth with me they think he is some man of
worship born. That may be, said the black knight, how be it as ye say
that he be no man of worship, he is a full likely person, and full like
to be a strong man; but thus much shall I grant you, said the black
knight, I shall put him down upon one foot, and his horse and his
harness he shall leave with me, for it were shame to me to do him any
more harm. When Sir Beaumains heard him say thus, he said, Sir knight,
thou art full liberal of my horse and my harness. I let thee wit it
cost thee nought, and whether it liketh thee or not this lawn will I
pass, maugre thine head, and horse nor harness gettest thou none of me,
but if thou win them with thy hands; and therefore let see what thou
canst do. Sayest thou that, said the black knight, now yield thy lady
from thee, for it beseemeth never a kitchen page to ride with such a
lady. Thou liest, said Beaumains, I am a gentleman born, and of more
high lineage than thou, and that will I prove on thy body. Then in
great wrath they departed with their horses, and came together as it
had been the thunder; and the black knight's spear brake, and Beaumains
thrust him through both his sides, and therewith his spear brake, and
the truncheon left still in his side. But nevertheless the black knight
drew his sword and smote many eager strokes and of great might, and
hurt Beaumains full sore. But at the last the black knight within an
hour and a half he fell down off his horse in a swoon, and there he
died. And then Beaumains saw him so well horsed and armed, then he
alight down, and armed him in his armour, and so took his horse, and
rode after the damsel. When she saw him come nigh, she said, Away,
kitchen knave, out of the wind, for the smell of thy foul clothes
grieveth me. Alas, she said, that ever such a knave as thou art should
by mishap slay so good a knight as thou hast done, but all this is
thine unhappiness. But hereby is one shall pay thee all thy payment,
and therefore yet I counsel thee, flee. It may happen me, said
Beaumains, to be beaten or slain, but I warn you, fair damsel, I will
not flee away nor leave your company for all that ye can say, for ever
ye say that they will kill me or beat me, but how soever it happeneth I
escape, and they lie on the ground. And therefore it were as good for
you to hold you still, thus all day rebuking me, for away will I not
till I see the uttermost of this journey, or else I will be slain or
truly beaten; therefore ride on your way, for follow you I will
whatsoever happen.


CHAPTER VIII.
-------------

_How the brother of the knight that was slain met with Beaumains, and
fought with Beaumains till he was yielden._

Thus as they rode together, they saw a knight come driving by them all
in green, both his horse and his harness; and when he came nigh the
damsel he asked her, Is that my brother the black knight that ye have
brought with you? Nay, nay, said she, this unhappy kitchen knave hath
slain your brother through unhappiness. Alas, said the green knight,
that is great pity that so noble a knight as he was should so unhappily
be slain, and namely of a knave's hand, as ye say that he is. Ah!
traitor, said the green knight, thou shalt die for slaying of my
brother, he was a full noble knight, and his name was Sir Percard. I
defy thee, said Beaumains, for I let thee wit I slew him knightly, and
not shamefully. Therewithall the green knight rode unto an horn that
was green, and it hung upon a thorn, and there he blew three deadly
notes, and there came two damsels and armed him lightly. And then took
he a great horse, and a green shield and a green spear. And then they
ran together with all their mights, and brake their spears unto their
hands. And then they drew their swords, and gave many sad strokes, and
either of them wounded other full ill. And at the last at an overthwart
Beaumains' horse struck the green knight's horse upon the side, he fell
to the earth. And then the green knight avoided his horse lightly, and
dressed him upon foot. That saw Beaumains, and therewithal he alight,
and they rushed together like two mighty champions a long while, and
sore they bled both. With that came the damsel and said, My lord the
green knight, why for shame stand ye so long fighting with the kitchen
knave? Alas, it is shame that ever ye were made knight, to see such a
lad match such a knight, as the weed overgrew the corn. Therewith the
green knight was ashamed, and therewithal he gave a great stroke of
might, and clave his shield through. When Beaumains saw his shield
cloven asunder he was a little ashamed of that stroke, and of her
language; and then he gave him such a buffet upon the helm that he fell
on his knees: and so suddenly Beaumains pulled him upon the ground
groveling. And then the green knight cried him mercy, and yielded him
unto Sir Beaumains, and prayed him to slay him not. All is in vain,
said Beaumains, for thou shalt die, but if this damsel that came with
me pray me to save thy life. And therewithal he unlaced his helm, like
as he would slay him. Fie upon thee, false kitchen page, I will never
pray thee to save his life, for I never will be so much in thy danger.
Then shall he die, said Beaumains. Not so hardy thou foul knave, said
the damsel, that thou slay him. Alas, said the green knight, suffer me
not to die, for a fair word may save me. Fair knight, said the green
knight, save my life, and I will forgive thee the death of my brother,
and for ever to become thy man, and thirty knights that hold of me for
ever shall do you service. In the devil's name, said the damsel, that
such a foul kitchen knave should have thee and thirty knights' service.
Sir knight, said Beaumains, all this availeth thee not, but if my
damsel speak with me for thy life. And therewithal he made a semblant
to slay him. Let be, said the damsel, thou foul knave, slay him not,
for and thou do thou shalt repent it. Damsel, said Beaumains, your
charge is to me a pleasure, and at your commandment his life shall be
saved, and else not. Then he said, Sir knight with the green arms, I
release thee quit at this damsel's request, for I will not make her
wroth; I will fulfill all that she chargeth me. And then the green
knight kneeled down, and did him homage with his sword. Then said the
damsel, Me repenteth, green knight, of your damage, and of your
brother's death the black knight, for of your help I had great need,
for I dread me sore to pass this forest. Nay, dread you not, said the
green knight, for ye shall lodge with me this night, and to morn I
shall help you through this forest. So they took their horses and rode
to his manor, which was fast there beside.


CHAPTER IX.
-----------

_How the damsel ever rebuked Sir Beaumains, and would not suffer him to
sit at her table, but called him kitchen boy._

And ever she rebuked Beaumains, and would not suffer him to sit at her
table, but as the green knight took him and sat him at a side table.
Marvel me thinketh, said the green knight to the damsel, why ye rebuke
this noble knight as ye do, for I warn you, damsel, he is a full noble
knight, and I know no knight is able to match him, therefore ye do
great wrong to rebuke him, for he shall do you right good service, for
whatsoever he maketh himself ye shall prove at the end that he is come
of a noble blood, and of king's lineage. Fie, fie, said the damsel, it
is shame for you to say of him such worship. Truly, said the green
knight, it were shame for me to say of him any disworship, for he hath
proved himself a better knight than I am, yet have I met with many
knights in my days, and never or this time have I found no knight his
match. And so that night they went unto rest, and all that night the
green knight commanded thirty knights privily to watch Beaumains, for
to keep him from all treason. And so on the morn they all arose, and
heard their mass and brake their fast, and then they took their horses
and rode on their way, and the green knight conveyed them through the
forest, and there the green knight said, My lord Beaumains, I and these
thirty knights shall be alway at your summons, both early and late, at
your calling, and where that ever ye will send us. It is well said,
said Beaumains; when that I call upon you ye must yield you unto king
Arthur and all your knights. If that ye so command us, we shall be
ready at all times, said the green knight. Fie, fie upon thee, said the
damsel, that any good knights should be obedient unto a kitchen knave.
So then departed the green knight and the damsel. And then she said
unto Beaumains, Why followest thou me thou kitchen boy, cast away thy
shield and thy spear and flee away, yet I counsel thee betimes or thou
shalt say right soon, Alas! For were thou as wight as ever was Wade, or
Launcelot, Tristram, or the good knight Sir Lamorake, thou shalt not
pass a pass here, that is called the pass perilous. Damsel, said
Beaumains, who is afeard let him flee, for it were shame to turn again
since I have ridden so long with you. Well, said the damsel, ye shall
soon, whether ye will or not.


CHAPTER X.
----------

_How the third brother, called the red knight, justed and fought
against Beaumains, and how Beaumains overcame him._

So within a while they saw a tower as white as any snow, well matchcold
all about, and double diked. And over the tower-gate there hung a fifty
shields of divers colours; and under that tower there was a fair
meadow. And therein were many knights and squires to behold scaffolds
and pavilions, for there upon the morn should be a great tournament;
and the lord of the tower was in his castle, and looked out at a
window, and saw a damsel, a dwarf, and a knight armed at all points. By
my faith, said the lord, with that knight will I just, for I see that
he is a knight errant. And so he armed him, and horsed him hastily. And
when he was on horseback with his shield and his spear, it was all red,
both his horse and his harness, and all that to him belonged. And when
that he came nigh him he wend it had been his brother the black knight.
And then he cried aloud, Brother what do ye in these marches? Nay, nay,
said the damsel, it is not he; this is but a kitchen knave, that was
brought up for alms in king Arthur's court. Nevertheless, said the red
knight, I will speak with him or he depart. Ah, said the damsel, this
knave hath killed thy brother, and Sir Kay named him Beaumains, and
this horse and harness was thy brother's the black knight. Also I saw
thy brother the green knight overcome of his hands. Now may ye be
revenged upon him, for I may never be quit of him.

With this either knight departed in sunder, and they came together with
all their might, and either of their horses fell to the earth, and they
avoided their horses, and put their shields afore them, and drew their
swords, and either gave other sad strokes, now here, now there, racing,
tracing, foining, and hurling like two boars, the space of two hours.
And then she cried on high to the red knight, Alas, thou noble red
knight, think what worship hath followed thee, let never a kitchen
knave endure thee so long as he doth. Then the red knight waxed wroth,
and doubled his strokes, and hurt Beaumains wonderly sore, that the
blood ran down to the ground, that it was wonder to see that strong
battle. Yet at the last Sir Beaumains strake him to the earth, and as
he would have slain the red knight he cried mercy, saying, Noble knight
slay me not, and I shall yield me to thee with fifty knights with me
that be at my commandment. And I forgive thee all the despite that thou
hast done to me, and the death of my brother the black knight. All this
availeth not, said Sir Beaumains, but if my damsel pray me to save thy
life. And therewith he made semblant to strike off his head. Let be,
thou Beaumains, slay him not, for he is a noble knight, and not so
hardy upon thine head but thou save him. Then Beaumains bad the red
knight stand up, and thank the damsel now of thy life. Then the red
knight prayed him to see his castle, and to be there all night. So the
damsel then granted him, and there they had merry cheer. But always the
damsel spake many foul words unto Beaumains, whereof the red knight had
great marvel, and all that night the red knight made threescore knights
to watch Beaumains, that he should have no shame nor villainy. And upon
the morn they heard mass, and dined, and the red knight came before
Beaumains with his threescore knights, and there he proffered him his
homage and fealty at all times, he and his knights to do him service. I
thank you, said Beaumains, but this ye shall grant me when I call upon
you, to come afore my lord king Arthur and yield you unto him to be his
knights. Sir, said the red knight, I will be ready and my fellowship at
your summons. So Sir Beaumains departed and the damsel, and ever she
rode chiding him in the foullest manner.


CHAPTER XI.
-----------

_How Sir Beaumains suffered great rebukes of the damsel, and he
suffered it patiently._

Damsel, said Beaumains, ye are uncourteous so to rebuke me as ye do,
for me seemeth I have done you good service, and ever ye threaten me I
shall be beaten with knights that we meet, but ever for all your boast
they lie in the dust or in the mire, and therefore I pray you rebuke me
no more: and when ye see me beaten or yielden as recreant, then may ye
bid me go from you shamefully, but first I let you wit I will not
depart from you, for I were worse than a fool and I would depart from
you all the while that I win worship. Well, said she, right soon there
shall meet a knight shall pay thee all thy wages, for he is the most
man of worship of the world, except king Arthur. I will well, said
Beaumains; the more he is of worship the more shall be my worship to
have ado with him. Then anon they were ware where was before them a
city rich and fair. And betwixt them and the city a mile and a half,
there was a fair meadow that seemed new mown, and therein were many
pavilions fair to behold. Lo, said the damsel, yonder is a lord that
owneth yonder city, and his custom is when the weather is fair to lie
in this meadow to just and tourney; and ever there be about him five
hundred knights and gentlemen of arms, and there be all manner of games
that any gentleman can devise. That goodly lord, said Beaumains, would
I fain see. Thou shalt see him time enough, said the damsel. And so as
she rode near she espied the pavilion where he was. Lo, said she, seest
thou yonder pavilion, that is all of the colour of Inde, and all manner
of thing that there is about, men and women, and horses trapped,
shields and spears, all of the colour of Inde, and his name is Sir
Persant of Inde, the most lordliest knight that ever thou lookedest on.
It may well be, said Beaumains, but be he never so stout a knight, in
this field I shall abide till that I see him under his shield. Ah fool,
said she, thou were better flee betimes. Why, said Beaumains, and he be
such a knight as ye make him, he will not set upon me with all his men,
or with his five hundred knights. For and there come no more but one at
once, I shall him not fail whilst my life lasteth. Fie, fie, said the
damsel, that ever such a dirty knave should blow such a boast. Damsel,
he said, ye are to blame so to rebuke me, for I had lever do five
battles than so to be rebuked; let him come, and then let him do his
worst. Sir, she said, I marvel what thou art, and of what kin thou art
come: boldly thou speakest, and boldly thou hast done, that have I
seen: therefore I pray thee save thyself and thou mayest, for thy horse
and thou have had great travail, and I dread we dwell over long from
the siege, for it is but hence seven mile, and all perilous passages we
are past, save all only this passage, and here I dread me sore lest ye
shall catch some hurt, therefore I would ye were hence, that ye were
not bruised nor hurt with this strong knight. But I let you wit this
Sir Persant of Inde is nothing of might nor strength unto the knight
that laid the siege about my lady. As for that, said Sir Beaumains, be
it as it may; for since I am come so nigh this knight I will prove his
might or I depart from him, and else I shall be shamed and I now
withdraw me from him. And therefore, damsel, have ye no doubt by the
grace of God I shall so deal with this knight, that within two hours
after noon I shall deliver him, and then shall we come to the siege by
day light. Oh mercy, marvel have I, said the damsel, what manner a man
ye be, for it may never be otherwise but that ye be come of a noble
blood, for so foul and shamefully did never woman rule a knight as I
have done you, and ever courteously ye have suffered me, and that came
never but of a gentle blood.

Damsel, said Beaumains, a knight may little do that may not suffer a
damsel; for whatsoever ye said unto me I took none heed to your words,
for the more ye said the more ye angered me, and my wrath I wreaked
upon them that I had ado withal. And therefore all the missaying that
ye missayed me furthered me in my battle, and caused me to think to
shew and prove myself at the end what I was; for peradventure though I
had meat in king Arthur's kitchen, yet I might have had meat enough in
other places; but all that I did it for to prove and to assay my
friends, and that shall be known another day, and whether that I be a
gentleman born or none, I let you wit, fair damsel, I have done you
gentleman's service, and peradventure better service yet will I do or I
depart from you. Alas, she said, fair Beaumains, forgive me all that I
have missaid or done against thee. With all my heart, said he, I
forgive it you, for ye did nothing but as ye should do, for all your
evil words pleased me; and damsel, said Beaumains, since it liketh you
to say thus fair to me, wit ye well it gladdeth mine heart greatly, and
now me seemeth there is no knight living but I am able enough for him.


CHAPTER XII.
------------

_How Sir Beaumains fought with Sir Persant of Inde, and made him to be
yielden._

With this Sir Persant of Inde had espied them as they hoved in the
field, and knightly he sent to them whether he came in war or in peace.
Say to thy lord, said Beaumains, I take no force, but whether as him
list himself. So the messenger went again unto Sir Persant, and told
him all his answer. Well, then will I have ado with him to the
utterance. And so he purveyed him and rode against him. And Beaumains
saw him and made him ready, and there they met with all that ever their
horses might run, and brake their spears either in three pieces, and
their horses rushed so together that both their horses fell dead to the
earth, and lightly they avoided their horses, and put their shields
afore them, and drew their swords, and gave many great strokes, that
sometime they hurtled together that they fell groveling on the ground.
Thus they fought two hours and more, that their shields and their
hauberks were all forhewn, and in many places they were wounded. So at
the last Sir Beaumains smote him through the side of the body, and then
he drew him back here and there, and knightly maintained his battle
long time. And at the last, though him loth were, Beaumains smote Sir
Persant above upon the helm that he fell groveling to the earth, and
then he lept upon him overthwart, and unlaced his helm to have slain
him. Then Sir Persant yielded him and asked him mercy. With that came
the damsel, and prayed to save his life. I will well, for it were pity
that this noble knight should die. Gramercy, said Persant, gentle
knight and damsel; for certainly now I wot well it was ye that slew my
brother the black knight, at the black thorn; he was a full noble
knight, his name was Sir Percard. Also, I am sure that ye are he that
won mine other brother the green knight, his name was Sir Pertolepe.
Also, ye won my brother the red knight Sir Perimones. And now since ye
have won these, this shall I do for to please you; ye shall have homage
and fealty of me, and an hundred knights, to be always at your
commandment, to go and ride where ye will command us. And so they went
unto Sir Persant's pavilion, and drank the wine and eat spices. And
afterward Sir Persant made him to rest upon a bed until supper time,
and after supper to bed again. And so we leave him there till on the
morn.


CHAPTER XIII.
-------------

_Of the goodly communication between Sir Persant and Beaumains, and how
he told him that his name was Sir Gareth._

And so on the morn the damsel and Sir Beaumains heard mass and brake
their fast, and so took their leave. Fair damsel, said Persant,
whitherward are ye away leading this knight? Sir, she said, this knight
is going to the siege that besiegeth my sister in the castle dangerous.
Ah, ah, said Persant, that is the knight of the red lawn, the which is
the most perilous knight that I know now living, and a man that is
without mercy, and men say that he hath seven men's strength. God save
you, said he to Beaumains, from that knight, for he doth great wrong to
that lady, and that is great pity, for she is one of the fairest ladies
of the world, and me seemeth that your damsel is her sister. Is not
your name Linet? said he. Yea, sir, said she, and my lady my sister's
name is dame Liones. Now shall I tell you, said Sir Persant, this red
knight of the red lawn hath lain long at the siege, well nigh this two
years, and many times he might have had her and he had would, but he
prolongeth the time to this intent for to have Sir Launcelot du Lake to
do battle with him, or Sir Tristram, or Sir Lamorak de Galis, or Sir
Gawaine: and this is his tarrying so long at the siege. Now, my lord
Sir Persant of Inde, said the damsel Linet, I require you that ye will
make this gentleman knight, or ever he fight with the red knight. I
will with all my heart, said Sir Persant, and it please him to take the
order of knighthood of so simple a man as I am. Sir, said Beaumains, I
thank you for your good will, for I am better sped, for certainly the
noble knight Sir Launcelot made me knight. Ah, said Persant, of a more
renowned knight might ye not be made knight. For of all knights he may
be called chief of knighthood: and so all the world saith that betwixt
three knights is parted clearly knighthood that is Launcelot du Lake,
Sir Tristram de Liones, and Sir Lamorak de Galis: these bear now the
renown. There be many other knights, as Sir Palamides the Saracen, and
Sir Sasere his brother; also Sir Bleoberis, and Sir Blamore de Ganis
his brother; also Sir Bors de Ganis, and Sir Ector de Maris, and Sir
Percivale de Galis; these and many more be noble knights, but there be
none that pass the three above said; therefore God speed you well, said
Sir Persant, for and ye may match the red knight ye shall be called the
fourth of the world. Sir, said Beaumains, I would fain be of good fame
and of knighthood. And I let you wit I came of good men, for I dare say
my father was a noble man, and so that ye will keep it in close, and
this damsel, I will tell you of what kin I am. We will not discover
you, said they both, till ye command us, by the faith we owe unto God.
Truly then, said he, my name is Gareth of Orkney, and king Lot was my
father, and my mother is king Arthur's sister; her name is dame
Morgawse, and Sir Gawaine is my brother, and Sir Agravaine, and Sir
Gaheris, and I am the youngest of them all. And yet wot not king Arthur
nor Sir Gawaine what I am.


CHAPTER XIV.
------------

_How the lady that was besieged had word from her sister how she had
brought a knight to fight for her, and what battles he had achieved._

So the book saith that the lady that was besieged had word of her
sister's coming by the dwarf, and a knight with her, and how he had
passed all the perilous passages. What manner a man is he? said the
lady. He is a noble knight, truly, madam, said the dwarf, and but a
young man, but he is as likely a man as ever ye saw any. What is he,
said the lady, and of what kin is he come, and of whom was he made
knight? Madam, said the dwarf, he is the king's son of Orkney, but his
name I will not tell you as at this time; but wit ye well, of Sir
Launcelot was he made knight, for of none other would he be made
knight, and Sir Kay named him Beaumains. How escaped he, said the lady,
from the brethren of Persant? Madam, he said, as a noble knight should.
First, he slew two brethren at a passage of a water. Ah! said she, they
were good knights, but they were murderers, the one hight Gherard de
Breusse, and that other knight hight Sir Arnold de Breusse. Then,
madam, he recountered with the black knight, and slew him in plain
battle, and so he took his horse and his armour and fought with the
green knight, and wan him in plain battle, and in likewise he served
the red knight, and after in the same wise he served the blue knight,
and wan him in plain battle. Then, said the lady, he hath overcome Sir
Persant of Inde, one of the noblest knights of the world. And the dwarf
said, He hath won all the four brethren, and slain the black knight.
And yet he did more tofore: he overthrew Sir Kay, and left him nigh
dead upon the ground; also he did a great battle with Sir Launcelot,
and there they departed on even hands: and then Sir Launcelot made him
knight. Dwarf, said the lady, I am glad of these tidings, therefore go
thou in an hermitage of mine here by, and there shalt thou bear with
thee of my wine in two flaggons of silver, they are of two gallons, and
also two cast of bread, with fat venison baked, and dainty fowls; and a
cup of gold here I deliver thee, that is rich and precious, and bear
all this to mine hermitage, and put it in the hermit's hands. And then
go thou unto my sister and greet her well, and command me unto that
gentle knight, and pray him to eat and to drink, and make him strong;
and say ye him I thank him of his courtesy and goodness, that he would
take upon him such labour for me that never did him bounty nor
courtesy. Also pray him that he be of good heart and good courage, for
he shall meet with a full noble knight, but he is neither of bounty,
courtesy, nor gentleness, for he attendeth unto no thing but to murder,
and that is the cause I cannot praise him nor love him. So this dwarf
departed and came to Sir Persant, where he found the damsel Linet and
Sir Beaumains, and there he told them all as ye have heard, and then
they took their leave; but Sir Persant took an ambling hackney and
conveyed them on their ways and then beleft them to God. And so within
a little while they came to that hermitage, and there they drank the
wine, and eat the venison and the fowls baken.

And so when they had repasted them well, the dwarf returned again with
his vessel unto the castle again, and there met with him the red knight
of the red lawns, and asked him from whence that he came, and where he
had been. Sir, said the dwarf, I have been with my lady's sister of
this castle, and she hath been at king Arthur's court, and brought a
knight with her. Then I account her travail but lost. For though she
had brought with her Sir Launcelot, Sir Tristram, Sir Lamorak, or Sir
Gawaine, I would think myself good enough for them all. It may well be,
said the dwarf, but this knight hath passed all the perilous passages,
and hath slain the black knight, and other two more, and won the green
knight, the red knight, and the blue knight. Then is he one of these
four that I have afore rehearsed. He is none of those, said the dwarf,
but he is a king's son. What is his name? said the red knight of the
red lawn. That will I not tell you, said the dwarf, but Sir Kay upon
scorn named him Beaumains. I care not, said the knight, what knight
soever he be, for I shall soon deliver him; and if I ever match him he
shall have a shameful death, as many other have had. That were pity,
said the dwarf, and it is marvel that ye make such shameful war upon
noble knights.


CHAPTER XV.
-----------

_How the damsel and Beaumains came to the siege, and came to a sycamore
tree, and there Beaumains blew a horn, and then the knight of the red
lawns came to fight with him._

Now leave we the knight and the dwarf, and speak we of Beaumains, that
all night lay in the hermitage, and upon the morn he and the damsel
Linet heard their mass, and brake their fast. And then they took their
horses and rode throughout a fair forest, and then they came to a
plain, and saw where were many pavilions and tents, and a fair castle,
and there was much smoke and great noise. And when they came near the
siege Sir Beaumains espied upon great trees, as he rode, how there hung
full goodly armed knights by the neck, and their shields about their
necks with their swords, and gilt spurs upon their heels, and so there
hung nigh a forty knights shamefully with full rich arms. Then Sir
Beaumains abated his countenance, and said, What meaneth this? Fair
Sir, said the damsel, abate not your cheer for all this sight, for ye
must encourage yourself, or else ye be all shent, for all these knights
came hither to this siege to rescue my sister dame Liones, and when the
red knight of the red lawn had overcome them he put them to this
shameful death, without mercy and pity. And in the same wise he will
serve you but if ye quit you better. Now Jesu defend me, said Sir
Beaumains, from such a villainous death and disgrace of arms, for
rather than I should so be farewithal, I would rather be slain manly in
plain battle. So were ye better, said the damsel; for trust not in him
is no courtesy, but all goeth to the death or shameful murder; and that
is pity, for he is a full likely man, well made of body, and a full
noble knight of prowess, and a lord of great lands and possessions.
Truly, said Beaumains, he may well be a good knight, but he useth
shameful customs, and it is marvel that he endureth so long, that none
of the noble knights of my lord Arthur have not dealt with him. And
then they rode to the dikes, and saw them double diked with full
warlike walls, and there were lodged many great lords nigh the walls,
and there was great noise of minstrelsy, and the sea betid upon the one
side of the walls, where were many ships and mariners' noise, with
'hale and how.' And also, there was fast by a sycamore tree, and there
hung a horn, the greatest that ever they saw, of an elephant's bone,
and this knight of the red lawn had hanged it up there, that if there
came any errant knight he must blow that horn, and then will he make
him ready, and come to him to do battle. But Sir, I pray you, said the
damsel Linet, blow ye not the horn till it be high noon, for now it is
about prime, and now encreaseth his might, that, as men say, he hath
seven men's strength. Ah, fie for shame, fair damsel, say ye never so
more to me, for, and he were as good a knight as ever was, I shall
never fail him in his most might, for either I will win worship
worshipfully, or die knightly in the field. And therewith he spurred
his horse straight to the sycamore tree, and blew so the horn eagerly
that all the siege and the castle rang thereof. And then there lept out
knights out of their tents and pavilions, and they within the castle
looked over the walls and out at windows. Then the red knight of the
red lawns armed him hastily, and two barons set on his spurs upon his
heels, and all was blood-red, his armour, spear, and shield. And an
earl buckled his helm upon his head, and then they brought him a red
spear and a red steed, and so he rode into a little vale under the
castle, that all that were in the castle and at the siege might behold
the battle.


CHAPTER XVI.
------------

_How the two knights met together, and of their talking, and how they
began their battle._

Sir, said the damsel Linet unto Sir Beaumains, look ye be glad and
light, for yonder is your deadly enemy, and at yonder window is my lady
my sister, dame Liones. Where? said Beaumains. Yonder, said the damsel,
and pointed with her finger. That is truth, said Beaumains. She
beseemeth afar the fairest lady that ever I looked upon, and truly, he
said, I ask no better quarrel than now for to do battle, for truly she
shall be my lady, and for her I will fight. And ever he looked up to
the window with glad countenance. And the lady Liones made courtesy to
him down to the earth, with holding up both their hands. With that the
red knight of the red lawns called to Sir Beaumains, Leave, sir knight,
thy looking, and behold me, I counsel thee, for I warn thee well she is
my lady, and for her I have done many strong battles. If thou have so
done, said Beaumains, me seemeth it was but waste labour, for she
loveth none of thy fellowship, and thou to love that loveth not thee,
is but great folly. For and I understood that she were not glad of my
coming I would be advised or I did battle for her. But I understand by
the besieging of this castle, she may forbear thy fellowship. And
therefore wit thou well, thou red knight of the red lawns, I love her,
and will rescue her, or else to die. Sayest thou that, said the red
knight, me seemeth thou ought of reason to beware by yonder knights
that thou sawest hang upon yonder trees. Fie for shame, said Beaumains,
that ever thou shouldest say or do so evil, for in that thou shamest
thyself and knighthood, and thou mayest be sure there will no lady love
thee that knoweth thy wicked customs. And now thou weenest that the
sight of these hanged knights should fear me. Nay truly, not so, that
shameful sight causeth me to have courage and hardiness against thee,
more than I would have had against thee and thou were a well-ruled
knight. Make thee ready, said the red knight of the red lawns, and talk
no longer with me. Then Sir Beaumains bad the damsel go from him, and
then they put their spears in their rests, and came together with all
their might that they had both, and either smote other in the midst of
their shields, that the breastplates, horsegirths, and cruppers brast,
and fell to the earth both, and the reins of their bridles in their
hands, and so they lay a great while sore astonied; and all they that
were in the castle and in the siege wend their necks had been broken,
and then many a stranger and other said the strange knight was a big
man and a noble juster, for or now we saw never no knight match the red
knight of the red lawns: thus they said, both within the castle and
without. Then lightly they avoided their horses, and put their shields
afore them, and drew their swords, and ran together like two fierce
lions, and either gave other such buffets upon their helms that they
reeled backward both two strides, and then they recovered both, and
hewed great pieces of their harness and their shields, that a great
part fell into the fields.


CHAPTER XVII.
-------------

_How after long fighting Beaumains overcame the knight and would have
slain him, but at the request of the lords he saved his life, and
made him to yield him to the lady._

And then thus they fought till it was past noon and never would stint
till at last they lacked wind both, and then they stood wagging and
scattering, panting, blowing and bleeding, that all that beheld them
for the most part wept for pity. So when they had rested them a while
they went to battle again, tracing, racing, foining, as two boars. And
at sometime they took their run as it had been two rams, and hurtled
together that sometime they fell groveling to the earth: and at
sometime they were so amazed that either took other's sword in stead of
his own.

Thus they endured till even-song time, that there was none that beheld
them might know whether was like to win the battle; and their armour
was so far hewn that men might see their naked sides, and in other
places they were naked, but ever the naked places they did defend. And
the red knight was a wily knight of war, and his wily fighting taught
Sir Beaumains to be wise; but he abought it full sore ere he did espy
his fighting. And thus by assent of them both, they granted either
other to rest; and so they set them down upon two mole-hills there
beside the fighting place, and either of them unlaced his helm and took
the cold wind, for either of their pages was fast by them, to come when
they called to unlace their harness and to set them on again at their
commandment. And then when Sir Beaumains' helm was off he looked by to
the window, and there he saw the fair lady dame Liones; and she made
him such countenance that his heart waxed light and jolly; and
therewith he bade the red knight of the red lawns make him ready, and
let us do the battle to the utterance. I will well, said the knight.
And then they laced up their helms, and their pages avoided, and they
stept together and fought freshly. But the red knight of the red lawns
awaited him, and at an overthwart smote him within the hand, that his
sword fell out of his hand: and yet he gave him another buffet on the
helm that he fell groveling to the earth, and the red knight fell over
him for to hold him down. Then cried the maiden Linet on high, O Sir
Beaumains, where is thy courage become! Alas, my lady my sister
beholdeth thee, and she sobbeth and weepeth, that maketh mine heart
heavy. When Sir Beaumains heard her say so, he started up with a great
might and gat him upon his feet, and lightly he lept to his sword and
griped it in his hand, and doubled his pace unto the red knight, and
there they fought a new battle together. But Sir Beaumains then doubled
his strokes, and smote so thick that he smote the sword out of his
hand, and then he smote him upon the helm that he fell to the earth,
and Sir Beaumains fell upon him, and unlaced his helm to have slain
him; and then he yielded him and asked mercy, and said with a loud
voice, O noble knight I yield me to thy mercy. Then Sir Beaumains
bethought him upon the knights that he had made to be hanged
shamefully, and then he said, I may not with my worship save thy life,
for the shameful deaths thou hast caused many full good knights to die.
Sir, said the red knight of the red lawns, hold your hand and ye shall
know the causes why I put them to so shameful a death. Say on, said Sir
Beaumains. Sir, I loved once a lady, a fair damsel, and she had her
brother slain, and she said it was Sir Launcelot du Lake, or else Sir
Gawaine, and she prayed me as that I loved her heartily that I would
make her a promise by the faith of my knighthood, for to labour daily
in arms until I met with one of them, and all that I might overcome I
should put them unto a villainous death; and this is the cause that I
have put all these knights to death, and so I ensured her to do all the
villainy unto king Arthur's knights, and that I should take vengeance
upon all these knights. And, Sir, now I will thee tell that every day
my strength encreaseth till noon, and all this time have I seven men's
strength.


CHAPTER XVIII.
--------------

_How the knight yielded him, and how Beaumains made him to go unto king
Arthur's court, and to cry Sir Launcelot mercy._

Then came there many earls, and barons, and noble knights, and prayed
that knight to save his life, and take him to your prisoner: and all
they fell upon their knees and prayed him of mercy, and that he would
save his life, and, Sir, they all said, it were fairer of him to take
homage and fealty, and let him hold his lands of you, than for to slay
him: by his death ye shall have none advantage, and his misdeeds that
be done may not be undone; and therefore he shall make amends to all
parties, and we all will become your men, and do you homage and fealty.
Fair lords, said Beaumains, wit you well I am full loth to slay this
knight, nevertheless he hath done passing ill and shamefully. But
insomuch all that he did was at a lady's request I blame him the less,
and so for your sake I will release him, that he shall have his life
upon this covenant, that he go within the castle and yield him there to
the lady, and if she will forgive and quit him, I will well; with this
that he make her amends of all the trespass he hath done against her
and her lands. And also, when that is done, that ye go unto the court
of king Arthur, and there that ye ask Sir Launcelot mercy, and Sir
Gawaine, for the evil will ye have had against them. Sir, said the red
knight of the red lawns, all this will I do as ye command, and certain
assurance and sureties ye shall have. And so then when the assurance
was made, he made his homage and fealty, and all those earls and barons
with him. And then the maiden Linet came to Sir Beaumains and unarmed
him, and searched his wounds, and stinted his blood, and in likewise
she did to the red knight of the red lawns. And there they sojourned
ten days in their tents, and the red knight made his lords and servants
to do all the pleasure that they might unto Sir Beaumains. And so
within a while the red knight of the red lawns went unto the castle and
put him in the lady Liones' grace, and so she received him upon
sufficient surety; so all her hurts were well restored of all that she
could complain. And then he departed unto the court of king Arthur, and
there openly the red knight of the red lawns put him in the mercy of
Sir Launcelot and Sir Gawaine, and there he told openly how he was
overcome and by whom, and also he told all the battles from the
beginning unto the ending. Mercy, said king Arthur and Sir Gawaine, we
marvel much of what blood he is come, for he is a noble knight. Have ye
no marvel, said Sir Launcelot, for ye shall right well wit that he is
come of a full noble blood, and as for his might and hardiness there be
but few now living that is so mighty as he is, and so noble of prowess.
It seemeth by you, said king Arthur, that ye know his name, and from
whence he is come, and of what blood he is. I suppose I do so, said
Launcelot, or else I would not have given him the order of knighthood;
but he gave me such charge at that time that I should never discover
him until he required me, or else it be known openly by some other.


CHAPTER XIX.
------------

_How Beaumains came to the lady, and when he came to the castle the
gates were closed against him, and of the words that the lady said to
him._

Now turn we unto Sir Beaumains, that desired of Linet that he might see
her sister his lady. Sir, said she, I would fain ye saw her. Then Sir
Beaumains all armed him, and took his horse and his spear, and rode
straight unto the castle. And when he came to the gate he found there
many men armed, and pulled up the drawbridge and drew the port close.
Then marvelled he why they would not suffer him to enter. And then he
looked up to the window; and there he saw the fair Liones, that said on
high, Go thy way, Sir Beaumains, for as yet thou shalt not have wholly
my love, unto the time that thou be called one of the number of the
worthy knights. And therefore go labour in worship this twelvemonth,
and then thou shalt hear new tidings. Alas, fair lady, said Beaumains,
I have not deserved that ye should shew me this strangeness, and I had
wend that I should have right good cheer with you, and unto my power I
have deserved thank, and well I am sure I have bought your love with
part of the best blood within my body. Fair courteous knight, said dame
Liones, be not displeased nor over hasty; for wit ye well your great
travail nor good love shall not be lost, for I consider your great
travail and labour, your bounty and your goodness, as me ought to do.
And therefore go on your way, and look that ye be of good comfort, for
all shall be for your worship and for the best, and perdy a twelvemonth
will soon be done, and trust me, fair knight, I shall be true to you,
and never to betray you, but to my death I shall love you and none
other. And therewithal she turned her from the window; and Sir
Beaumains rode away ward from the castle, making great dole, and so he
rode here and there, and wist not where he rode, till it was dark
night. And then it happened him to come to a poor man's house, and
there he was harboured all that night. But Sir Beaumains had no rest,
but wallowed and writhed for the love of the lady of the castle. And so
upon the morrow he took his horse, and rode until underne, and then he
came to a broad water, and thereby was a great lodge, and there he
alight to sleep, and laid his head upon the shield, and betook his
horse to the dwarf, and commanded him to watch all night. Now turn we
to the lady of the same castle that thought much upon Beaumains, and
then she called unto her Sir Gringamore her brother, and prayed him in
all manner, as he loved her heartily, that he would ride after Sir
Beaumains, and ever have ye wait upon him till ye may find him
sleeping, for I am sure in his heaviness he will alight down in some
place and lay him down to sleep: and therefore have ye your wait upon
him, and in the priviest manner ye can, take his dwarf, and go ye your
way with him as fast as ever ye may or Sir Beaumains awake. For my
sister Linet telleth me that he can tell of what kindred he is come,
and what is his right name. And the mean while I and my sister will
ride unto your castle to await when ye bring with you the dwarf. And
then when ye have brought him unto your castle I will have him in
examination myself: unto the time I know what is his right name and of
what kindred he is come, shall I never be merry at my heart. Sister,
said Sir Gringamore, all this shall be done after your intent. And so
he rode all the other day and the night till that he found Sir
Beaumains lying by a water, and his head upon his shield, for to sleep.
And then when he saw Sir Beaumains fast on sleep, he came stilly
stalking behind the dwarf, and plucked him fast under his arm, and so
he rode away with him as fast as ever he might unto his own castle. And
this Sir Gringamore's arms were all black, and that to him belonged.
But ever as he rode with the dwarf toward his castle, he cried unto his
lord and prayed him of help. And therewith awoke Sir Beaumains, and up
he lept lightly, and saw where Sir Gringamore rode his way with the
dwarf, and so Sir Gringamore rode out of his sight.


CHAPTER XX.
-----------

_How Sir Beaumains rode after to rescue his dwarf, and came into the
castle where he was._

Then Sir Beaumains put on his helm anon, and buckled his shield, and
took his horse and rode after him all that ever he might ride, through
marshes and fields and great dales, that many times his horse and he
plunged over the head in deep mires, for he knew not the way, but took
the gainest way in that fury, that many times he was like to perish.
And at the last him happened to come to a fair green way, and there he
met with a poor man of the country whom he saluted, and asked him
whether he met not with a knight upon a black horse and all black
harness, and a little dwarf sitting behind him with heavy cheer. Sir,
said this poor man, here by me came Sir Gringamore the knight, with
such a dwarf mourning as ye say, and therefore I counsel you not follow
him, for he is one of the most perilous knights of the world, and his
castle is here nigh hand but two mile, therefore we advise you ride not
after Sir Gringamore, but if ye owe him good will.

So leave we Sir Beaumains riding toward the castle, and speak we of Sir
Gringamore and the dwarf. Anon as the dwarf was come to the castle,
dame Liones and dame Linet her sister, asked the dwarf where was his
master born, and of what lineage he was come? And but if thou tell me,
said dame Liones, thou shalt never escape this castle, but ever here to
be prisoner. As for that, said the dwarf, I fear not greatly to tell
his name, and of what kin he is come. Wit ye well he is a king's son,
and his mother is sister to king Arthur, and he is brother to the good
knight Sir Gawaine, and his name is Sir Gareth of Orkney. And now I
have told you his right name, I pray you, fair lady, let me go to my
lord again, for he will never out of this country until that he have me
again. And if he be angry he will do much harm or that he be stint, and
work you wrack in this country. As for that threatening, said Sir
Gringamore, be it as it be may, we will go to dinner. And so they
washed and went to meat, and made them merry and well at ease, and
because the lady Liones of the castle was there they made great joy.
Truly madam, said Linet unto her sister, well may he be a king's son,
for he hath many good taches on him, for he is courteous and mild, and
the most suffering man that ever I met withall. For I dare say there
was never gentlewoman reviled man in so foul manner as I have rebuked
him; and at all times he gave me goodly and meek answers again. And as
they sat thus talking, there came Sir Gareth in at the gate with an
angry countenance, and his sword drawn in his hand, and cried aloud
that all the castle might hear it, saying, Thou traitor Sir Gringamore,
deliver me my dwarf again, or by the faith that I owe to the order of
knighthood, I shall do thee all the harm that I can. Then Sir
Gringamore looked out at a window and said, Sir Gareth of Orkney, leave
thy boasting words, for thou gettest not thy dwarf again. Thou coward
knight, said Sir Gareth, bring him with thee, and come and do battle
with me, and win him and take him. So will I do, said Sir Gringamore,
and me list, but for all thy great words thou gettest him not. Ah! fair
brother, said dame Liones, I would he had his dwarf again, for I would
he were not wroth, for now he hath told me all my desire I keep no more
of the dwarf. And also, brother, he hath done much for me, and
delivered me from the red knight of the red lawns, and therefore,
brother, I owe him my service afore all knights living. And wit ye well
that I love him before all other, and full fain I would speak with him.
But in no wise I would that he wist what I were, but that I were
another strange lady. Well, said Sir Gringamore, since I know now your
will, I will obey now unto him. And right therewithall he went down
unto Sir Gareth, and said, Sir, I cry you mercy, and all that I have
misdone I will amend it at your will. And therefore I pray you that ye
would alight, and take such cheer as I can make you in this castle.
Shall I have my dwarf? said Sir Gareth. Yea, sir, and all the pleasure
that I can make you; for as soon as your dwarf told me what ye were,
and of what blood ye are come, and what noble deeds ye have done in
these marches, then I repented of my deeds. And then Sir Gareth alight,
and there came his dwarf and took his horse. O my fellow, said Sir
Gareth, I have had many adventures for thy sake. And so Sir Gringamore
took him by the hand, and led him into the hall where his own wife was.


CHAPTER XXI.
------------

_How Sir Gareth, otherwise called Beaumains, came to the presence of
his lady, and how they took acquaintance, and of their love._

And then came forth dame Liones arrayed like a princess, and there she
made him passing good cheer, and he her again. And they had goodly
language and lovely countenance together. And Sir Gareth thought many
times, Would that the lady of the castle perilous were so fair as she
was. There were all manner of games and plays of dancing and singing.
And ever the more Sir Gareth beheld that lady, the more he loved her,
and so he burned in love that he was past himself in his reason. And
forth toward night they went unto supper, and Sir Gareth might not eat
for his love was so hot, that he wist not where he was. All these looks
espied Sir Gringamore, and then after supper he called his sister dame
Liones unto a chamber and said, Fair sister, I have well espied your
countenance between you and this knight, and I will, sister, that ye
wit he is a full noble knight, and if ye can make him to abide here I
will do to him all the pleasure that I can, for and ye were better than
ye are, ye were well bestowed upon him. Fair brother, said dame Liones,
I understand well that the knight is good, and come he is of a noble
house. Notwithstanding I will assay him better, how be it I am most
beholding to him of any earthly man, for he hath had great labour for
my love, and passed many a dangerous passage. Right so Sir Gringamore
went unto Sir Gareth and said, Sir, make ye good cheer, for ye shall
have none other cause, for this lady my sister is yours at all times,
her worship saved, for wit ye well she loveth you as well as ye do her,
and better if better may be. And I wist that, said Sir Gareth, there
lived not a gladder man than I would be. Upon my worship, said Sir
Gringamore, trust unto my promise; and as long as it liketh you ye
shall sojourn with me, and this lady shall be with us daily and nightly
to make you all the cheer that she can. I will well, said Sir Gareth,
for I have promised to be nigh this country this twelvemonth. And well
I am sure king Arthur and other noble knights will find me where that I
am within this twelvemonth. For I shall be sought and found, if that I
be on live. And then the noble knight Sir Gareth went unto the dame
Liones, which he then much loved, and kissed her many times, and either
made great joy of other. And there she promised him her love, certainly
to love him and none other the days of her life. Then this lady, dame
Liones, by the assent of her brother, told Sir Gareth all the truth
what she was, and how she was the same lady that he did battle for, and
how she was lady of the castle perilous. And there she told him how she
caused her brother to take away his dwarf.


CHAPTER XXII.
-------------

_How, at night, came an armed knight and fought with Sir Gareth, and
he, sore hurt in the thigh, smote off the knight's head._

For this cause, to know the certainty what was your name, and of what
kin ye were come. And then she let fetch before him Linet the damsel,
which had ridden with him many dreary ways. Then was Sir Gareth more
gladder than he was tofore. And then they troth plight each other to
love, and never to fail while their life lasted. And at after supper
was made clean avoidance, that every lord and lady should go unto his
rest. But Sir Gareth said plainly that he would go no further than the
hall, for in such places, he said, was convenient for an errant knight
to take his rest in. And so there were ordained great couches, and
thereon feather beds, and there laid him down to sleep. And within
awhile he looked afore him and perceived and saw come an armed knight,
with many lights about him. And this knight had a long battle-axe in
his hand, and made grim countenance to smite him. When Sir Gareth saw
him come in that wise, he lept out of his bed, and gat in his hand his
sword, and lept straight toward that knight. And when the knight saw
Sir Gareth come so fiercely upon him, he smote him with a thrust
through the thick of the thigh, that the wound was a shaftmon broad,
and had cut a-two many veins and sinews. And therewithal Sir Gareth
smote him upon the helm such a buffet that he fell groveling, and then
he lept over him, and unlaced his helm, and smote off his head from the
body. And then he bled so fast that he might not stand, but so he laid
him down upon his bed, and there he swooned, and lay as he had been
dead. Then dame Liones found him, and cried aloud, that her brother Sir
Gringamore heard and came down. And when he saw Sir Gareth so
shamefully wounded, he was sore displeased, and said, I am shamed that
this noble knight is thus honoured. Sister, said Sir Gringamore, How
may this be that ye be here, and this noble knight wounded? Brother,
said dame Liones, I cannot tell you, for it was not done by me, nor by
mine assent. For he is my lord, and I am his, and he must be my
husband, therefore, brother, I will that ye wit I shame me not to be
with him, nor to do him all the pleasure that I can. Sister, said Sir
Gringamore, and I will that ye wit it, and Sir Gareth both, that it was
never done by me nor by mine assent that this unhappy deed was done.
And there they stanched his bleeding as well as they might. And great
sorrow made Sir Gringamore and dame Liones. And forthwithal came dame
Linet and took up the head in the sight of them all, and anointed it
with an ointment there as it was smitten off, and in the same wise she
did to the other part there as the head stuck, and then she set it
together, and it stuck as fast as ever it did. And the knight arose
lightly up, and the damsel Linet put him in her chamber. All this saw
Sir Gringamore and dame Liones, and so did Sir Gareth, and well he
espied that it was the damsel Linet that rode with him through the
perilous passages. Ah well, damsel, said Sir Gareth, I wend ye would
not have done as ye have done. My lord Gareth, said the damsel Linet,
all that I have done I will avow, and all that I have done shall be for
your honour and worship, and to us all. And so within a while, Sir
Gareth was nigh whole, and waxed light and jocund, and sang, danced,
and gamed. And at night, because he was wounded afore, he laid his
armour and his sword nigh his bed side.


CHAPTER XXIII.
--------------

_How the said knight came again the next night, and was beheaded again.
And how at the feast of Pentecost all the knights that Sir Gareth had
overcome came and yielded them to king Arthur._

Right as soon as Sir Gareth was in his bed he espied an armed knight
coming toward the bed, and therewith he leaped lightly out, and they
hurtled together with great ire and malice all about the hall, and
there was great light as it had been the number of twenty torches both
before and behind, so that Sir Gareth strained him so that his old
wound burst out again bleeding, but he was hot and courageous, and took
no keep, but with his great force he struck down that knight, and
voided his helm and struck off his head. Then he hewed the head in an
hundred pieces. And when he had done so, he took up all those pieces
and threw them out at a window into the ditches of the castle; and by
this done he was so faint that scarcely he might stand for bleeding.
And then he fell in a deadly swoon in the floor. And then dame Liones
found him, and cried so that Sir Gringamore heard. And when he came and
found Sir Gareth in that plight, he made great sorrow, and there he
awaked Sir Gareth, and gave him a drink that relieved him wonderly
well, but the sorrow that dame Liones made there may no tongue tell,
for she so fared with herself as she would have died. Right so came
this damsel Linet before them all, and she had fetched all the gobbets
of the head that Sir Gareth had thrown out at a window, and there she
anointed them as she had done tofore, and set them together again.
Well, damsel Linet, said Sir Gareth, I have not deserved all this
despite that ye do unto me. Sir knight, she said, I have nothing done
but I will avow, and all that I have done shall be to your worship and
to us all. And then was Sir Gareth stanched of his bleeding. But the
leeches said that there was no man that bare the life should heal him
throughout of his wound, but if they healed him that caused that stroke
by enchantment.

So leave we Sir Gareth there with Sir Gringamore and his sisters, and
turn we unto king Arthur, that at the next feast of Pentecost held his
feast, and there came the green knight with fifty knights, and yielded
them all unto king Arthur. And so there came the red knight, his
brother, and yielded him to king Arthur, and threescore knights with
him. Also there came the blue knight, brother to them, with an hundred
knights, and yielded them unto king Arthur. And the green knight's name
was Pertolepe, and the red knight's name was Perimones, and the blue
knight's name was Sir Persant of Inde. These three brethren told king
Arthur how they were overcome by a knight that a damsel had with her,
and called him Beaumains. By my faith, said the king, I marvel what
knight he is, and of what lineage he is come; he was with me a
twelvemonth, and poorly and shamefully he was fostered, and Sir Kay in
scorn named him Beaumains. So right as the king stood so talking with
these three brethren there came Sir Launcelot du Lake, and told the
king that there was come a goodly lord with six hundred knights with
him. Then the king went out of Carlion, for there was the least, and
there came to him this lord, and saluted the king in a goodly manner.
What will ye? said king Arthur, and what is your errand? Sir, he said,
my name is the red knight of the red lawns, but my name is Sir
Ironside, and, sir, wit ye well here I am sent to you of a knight that
is called Beaumains, for he won me in plain battle, hand for hand, and
so did never no knight but he that ever had the better of me this
thirty winter, the which commanded to yield me to you at your will. Ye
are welcome, said the king, for ye have been long a great foe to me and
to my court, and now I trust I shall so entreat you that ye shall be my
friend. Sir, both I and these six hundred knights shall always be at
your summons to do you service as may lie in our powers. Truly, said
king Arthur, I am much beholding unto that knight that hath so put his
body in devoir to worship me and my court. And as to thee, Ironside,
that art called the red knight of the red lawns, thou art called a
perilous knight. And if thou wilt hold of me I shall worship thee and
make thee knight of the Table Round: but then thou must be no more a
murderer. Sir, as to that I have promised unto Sir Beaumains never more
to use such customs, for all the shameful customs that I used I did at
the request of a lady that I loved; and therefore I must go unto Sir
Launcelot, and unto Sir Gawaine, and ask them forgiveness of the evil
will I had unto them, for all that I put to death was all only for the
love of Sir Launcelot and Sir Gawaine. They be here now, said the king,
afore thee, now may ye say to them what ye will. And then he kneeled
down unto Sir Launcelot and to Sir Gawaine, and prayed them of
forgiveness of his enmity that ever he had against them.


CHAPTER XXIV.
-------------

_How king Arthur pardoned them, and demanded of them where Sir Gareth
was._

Then goodly they said all at once, God forgive you, and we do, and pray
you that ye will tell us where we may find Sir Beaumains. Fair lords,
said Sir Ironside, I cannot tell you, for it is full hard to find him,
for all such young knights as he is one, when they be in their
adventures be never abiding in one place. But to say the worship that
the red knight of the red lawns and Sir Persant and his brothers said
of Beaumains it was marvel to hear. Well, my fair lords, said king
Arthur, wit you well I shall do you honour for the love of Sir
Beaumains, and as soon as ever I meet with him I shall make you all
upon one day knights of the Table Round. And as to thee, Sir Persant of
Inde, thou hast ever been called a full noble knight, and so have ever
been thy three brethren called. But I marvel, said the king, that I
hear not of the black knight your brother, he was a full noble knight.
Sir, said Pertolepe the green knight, Sir Beaumains slew him in a
recounter with his spear, his name was Sir Percard. That was great
pity, said the king, and so said many knights. For these four brethren
were full well known in the court of king Arthur for noble knights, for
long time they had holden war against the knights of the Table Round.
Then said Pertolepe the green knight unto the king: At a passage of the
water of Mortaise there encountered Sir Beaumains with two brethren
that ever for the most part kept that passage, and they were two deadly
knights, and there he slew the eldest brother in the water, and smote
him upon the head such a buffet that he fell down in the water and
there he was drowned, and his name was Gherard le Breusse: and after he
slew the other brother upon the land, and his name was Sir Arnold le
Breusse.


CHAPTER XXV.
------------

_How the queen of Orkney came to this feast of Pentecost, and Sir
Gawaine and his brethren came to ask her blessing._

So then the king and they went to meat, and were served in the best
manner. And as they sat at the meat, there came in the queen of Orkney,
with ladies and knights a great number. And then Sir Gawaine, Sir
Agravaine and Gaheris arose and went to her, and saluted her upon their
knees and asked her blessing: for in fifteen year they had not seen
her. Then she spake on high to her brother king Arthur: Where have ye
done my young son Sir Gareth. He was here amongst you a twelvemonth,
and ye made a kitchen knave of him, the which is shame to you all.
Alas, where have ye done my dear son that was my joy and bliss? Oh dear
mother, said Sir Gawaine, I knew him not. Nor I, said the king, that
now me repenteth, but thanked be God he is proved a worshipful knight
as any is now living of his years, and I shall never be glad till I may
find him. Ah brother, said the queen unto king Arthur, and to Sir
Gawaine, and to all her sons, ye did yourself great shame when ye
amongst you kept my son Gareth in the kitchen and fed him like a poor
hog. Fair sister, said king Arthur, ye shall right well wit I knew him
not, nor no more did Sir Gawaine nor his brethren. But since it is so
that he is thus gone from us all, we must shape a remedy to find him.
Also, sister, me seemeth ye might have done me to wit of his coming,
and then, and I had not done well to him, ye might have blamed me. For
when he came to this court he came leaning upon two men's shoulders, as
though he might not have gone. And then he asked me three gifts, and
one he asked the same day, that was that I would give him meat enough
that twelvemonth. And the other two gifts he asked that day a
twelvemonth, and that was that he might have the adventure of the
damsel Linet, and the third was that Sir Launcelot should make him
knight when he desired him. And so I granted him all his desire, and
many in this court marvelled that he desired his sustenance for a
twelvemonth, and thereby we deemed many of us that he was not come of a
noble house. Sir, said the queen of Orkney unto king Arthur her
brother, wit you well that I sent him unto you right well armed and
horsed, and worshipfully beseen of his body, and gold and silver plenty
to spend. It may be, said the king, but thereof saw we none, save that
same day as he departed from us, knights told me that there came a
dwarf hither suddenly, and brought him armour and a good horse, full
well and richly beseen, and thereat we had all marvel from whence that
riches came, that we deemed all that he was come of men of worship.
Brother, said the queen, all that ye say I believe, for ever since he
was grown he was marvellously witted: and ever he was faithful and true
of his promise. But I marvel, said she, that Sir Kay did mock him and
scorn him, and gave him that name Beaumains: yet Sir Kay, said the
queen, named him more righteously than he wend; for I dare say, and he
be on live, he is as fair an handed man and well disposed as any is
living. Sister, said Arthur, let this language be still, and by the
grace of God he shall be found and he be within these seven realms, and
let all this pass, and be merry, for he is proved to be a man of
worship, and that is my joy.


CHAPTER XXVI.
-------------

_How king Arthur sent for the lady Liones, and how she let cry a
tourney at her castle, where as came many knights._

Then said Sir Gawaine and his brethren unto Arthur, Sir, and ye will
give us leave we will go and seek our brother. Nay, said Sir Launcelot,
that shall ye not need, and so said Sir Baudwin of Britain: for as by
our advice the king shall send unto dame Liones a messager, and pray
her that she will come to the court in all the haste that she may, and
doubt ye not she will come, and then she may give you best counsel
where ye shall find him. This is well said of you, said the king. So
then goodly letters were made, and the messager sent forth, that night
and day he went till he came unto the castle perilous. And then the
lady dame Liones was sent for there as she was with Sir Gringamore her
brother and Sir Gareth. And when she understood this message, she bad
him ride on his way unto king Arthur, and she would come after in all
goodly haste. Then when she came to Sir Gringamore and to Sir Gareth,
she told them all how king Arthur had sent for her. That is because of
me, said Sir Gareth. Now advise me, said dame Liones, what shall I say,
and in what manner I shall rule me. My lady and my love, said Sir
Gareth, I pray you in no manner of wise be ye aknown where I am, but
well I wot my mother is there and all my brethren, and they will take
upon them to seek me; and I wot well that they do. But this, madam, I
would ye said and advised the king, when he questioneth with you of me:
then may ye say, this is your advice, that, and it like his good grace,
ye will do make a cry against the feast of the Assumption of our Lady,
that what knight there proveth him best, he shall weld you and all your
land. And if so be that he be a wedded man, that his wife shall have
the degree and a coronal of gold, beset with stones of virtue to the
value of a thousand pound, and a white jerfalcon.

So dame Liones departed and came to king Arthur, where she was nobly
received, and there she was sore questioned of the king, and of the
queen of Orkney. And she answered, where Sir Gareth was she could not
tell. But thus much she said unto Arthur; Sir, I will let cry a
tournament, that shall be done before my castle at the Assumption of
our Lady, and the cry shall be this, that you my lord Arthur shall be
there and your knights, and I will purvey that my knights shall be
against yours: and then I am sure ye shall hear of Sir Gareth. This is
well advised, said king Arthur: and so she departed. And the king and
she made great provision for that tournament. When dame Liones was come
to the Isle of Avilion, that was the same isle there as her brother Sir
Gringamore dwelt, then she told him all how she had done, and what
promise she had made to king Arthur. Alas, said Sir Gareth, I have been
so wounded by mishap sithen I came into this castle, that I shall not
be able to do at that tournament like a knight, for I was never
thoroughly whole since I was hurt. Be ye of good cheer, said the damsel
Linet, for I undertake within these fifteen days for to make you whole,
and as lusty as ever ye were. And then she laid an ointment and a salve
to him as it pleased her, that he was never so fresh nor so lusty. Then
said the damsel Linet: Send you unto Sir Persant of Inde, and summon
him and his knights to be here with you as they have promised. Also,
that ye send unto Sir Ironside, that is the red knight of the red
lawns, and charge him that he be ready with you with his whole sum of
knights, and then shall ye be able to match with king Arthur and his
knights. So this was done, and all knights were sent for unto the
castle perilous. And then the red knight answered and said unto dame
Liones, and to Sir Gareth, Madam, and my lord Sir Gareth, ye shall
understand that I have been at the court of king Arthur, and Sir
Persant of Inde and his brethren, and there we have done our homage as
ye commanded us. Also, Sir Ironside said, I have taken upon me with Sir
Persant of Inde and his brethren to hold party against my lord Sir
Launcelot and the knights of that court. And this have I done for the
love of my lady dame Liones, and you my lord Sir Gareth. Ye have well
done, said Sir Gareth. But wit you well ye shall be full sore matched
with the most noble knights of the world, therefore we must purvey us
of good knights, where we may get them. That is well said, said Sir
Persant, and worshipfully. And so the cry was made in England, Wales,
and Scotland, Ireland, and Cornwall, and in all the out isles, and in
Britany, and in many countries; that at the feast of the Assumption of
our Lady next coming, men should come to the castle perilous, beside
the Isle of Avilion, and there all the knights that there came should
have the choice whether them list to be on the one party with the
knights of the castle, or on the other party with king Arthur. And two
months was to the day that the tournament should be. And so there came
many good knights that were at large, and held them for the most part
against king Arthur and his knights of the Round Table, and came on the
side of them of the castle. For Sir Epinogrus was the first, and he was
the king's son of Northumberland, and Sir Palamides the Saracen was
another, and Sir Safere his brother, and Sir Sagwarides his brother,
but they were christened, and Sir Malegrine another, and Sir Brian de
les Isles, a noble knight, and Sir Grummore Gummursum, a good knight of
Scotland, and Sir Carados of the dolorous tower, a noble knight, and
Sir Turquin his brother, and Sir Arnold and Sir Gauter, two brethren,
good knights of Cornwall: there came Sir Tristram de Liones, and with
him Sir Dinadan the seneschal and Sir Sadok; but this Sir Tristram was
not at that time knight of the Table Round, but he was one of the best
knights of the world. And so all these noble knights accompanied them
with the lady of the castle, and with the red knight of the red lawns,
but as for Sir Gareth, he would not take upon him more but as other
mean knights.


CHAPTER XXVII.
--------------

_How king Arthur went to the tournament with his knights, and how the
lady received him worshipfully, and how the knights encountered._

And then there came with king Arthur Sir Gawaine, Agravaine and
Gaheris, his brethren. And then his nephews Sir Uwaine le Blanchemains,
and Sir Aglovale, Sir Tor, Sir Percivale de Galis, and Sir Lamorak de
Galis. Then came Sir Launcelot du Lake with his brethren, nephews, and
cousins, as Sir Lionel, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Bors de Ganis, and Sir
Galihodin, Sir Galihud, and many more of Sir Launcelot's blood; and Sir
Dinadan, Sir La Cote Male Taile his brother, a good knight, and Sir
Sagramore, a good knight; and all the most part of the Round Table.
Also there came with king Arthur these knights, the king of Ireland,
king Agwisaunce, and the king of Scotland, king Carados, and king
Uriens of the land of Gore, and king Bagdemagus, and his son Sir
Meliaganus, and Sir Galahault the noble prince. All these kings,
princes, earls, barons, and other noble knights, as Sir Brandiles, Sir
Uwaine les Avoutres, and Sir Kay, Sir Bedivere, Sir Meliot de Logris,
Sir Petipase of Winchelsea, Sir Godelake. All these came with king
Arthur, and many more that cannot be rehearsed.

Now leave we of these kings and knights, and let us speak of the great
array that was made within the castle and about the castle for both
parties. The lady dame Liones ordained great array upon her part for
her noble knights, for all manner of lodging and victual that came by
land and by water, that there lacked nothing for her party, nor for the
other, but there was plenty to be had for gold and silver for king
Arthur and his knights. And then there came the harbingers from king
Arthur, for to harbour him and his kings, dukes, earls, barons, and
knights. And then Sir Gareth prayed dame Liones, and the red knight of
the red lawns, and Sir Persant and his brother, and Sir Gringamore,
that in no wise there should none of them tell his name, and make no
more of him than of the least knight that there was; for he said, I
will not be known of neither more nor less, neither at the beginning
neither at the ending.

Then dame Liones said unto Sir Gareth, Sir, I will lend you a ring, but
I would pray you as ye love me heartily let me have it again when the
tournament is done, for that ring increaseth my beauty much more than
it is of itself. And the virtue of my ring is that that is green it
will turn to red, and that is red it will turn in likeness to green,
and that is blue it will turn to likeness of white, and that is white
it will turn in likeness to blue, and so it will do of all manner of
colours. Also, who that beareth my ring shall lose no blood, and for
great love I will give you this ring. Gramercy, said Sir Gareth, mine
own lady, for this ring is passing meet for me, for it will turn all
manner of likeness that I am in, and that shall cause me that I shall
not be known. Then Sir Gringamore gave Sir Gareth a bay courser that
was a passing good horse: also he gave him good armour and sure, and a
noble sword that some time Sir Gringamore's father won upon an heathen
tyrant. And so thus every knight made him ready to that tournament. And
king Arthur was come two days tofore the Assumption of our Lady. And
there was all manner of royalty of all minstrelsy that might be found.
Also there came queen Guenever, and the queen of Orkney, Sir Gareth's
mother. And upon the Assumption day, when mass and matins was done,
there were heralds with trumpets commanded to blow to the field. And so
there came out Sir Epinogrus, the king's son of Northumberland, from
the castle, and there encountered with him Sir Sagramore le Desirous,
and either of them brake their spears to their hands. And then came in
Sir Palamides out of the castle, and there encountered with him
Gawaine, and either of them smote other so hard that both the good
knights and their horses fell to the earth. And then knights of either
party rescued their knights. And then came in Sir Safere and Sir
Sagwarides, brethren unto Sir Palamides, and there encountered Sir
Agravaine with Sir Safere, and Sir Gaheris encountered with Sir
Sagwarides. So Sir Safere smote down Agravaine, Sir Gawaine's brother,
and Sir Segwarides, Sir Safere's brother, smote down Sir Gaheris. And
Sir Malgrine, a knight of the castle, encountered with Sir Uwaine le
Blanchemains, and there Sir Uwaine gave Sir Malgrine a fall, that he
had almost broken his neck.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
---------------

_How the knights bare them in battle._

Then Sir Brian de les Isles, and Grummore Grummorsum, knights of the
castle, encountered with Sir Aglovale and Sir Tor, and Sir Tor smote
down Sir Grummore Grummorsum to the earth. Then came in Sir Carados of
the dolorous tower, and Sir Turquine, knights of the castle, and there
encountered with them Sir Percivale de Galis and Sir Lamorak de Galis,
that were two brethren, and there encountered Sir Percivale with Sir
Carados, and either brake their spears unto their hands, and then Sir
Turquine with Sir Lamorak, and either of them smote down other, horse
and all, to the earth, and either parties rescued other and horsed them
again. And Sir Arnold, and Sir Gauter, knights of the castle,
encountered with Sir Brandiles and Sir Kay, and these four knights
encountered mightily, and brake their spears to their hands. Then came
in Sir Tristram, and Sir Saduk, and Sir Dinas, knights of the castle,
and there encountered Sir Tristram with Sir Bedivere, and there Sir
Bedivere was smitten to the earth, both horse and man: and Sir Saduk
encountered with Sir Petipase, and there Sir Saduk was overthrown. And
there Uwaine les Avoutres smote down Sir Dinas the seneschal. Then came
in Sir Persant of Inde, a knight of the castle, and there encountered
with him Sir Launcelot du Lake, and there he smote Sir Persant, horse
and man, to the earth. Then came Sir Pertolope from the castle, and
there encountered with him Sir Lionel, and there Sir Pertolope the
green knight smote down Sir Lionel, brother to Sir Launcelot. All this
as marked by noble heralds, who bare him best, and their names. And
then came into the field Sir Perimones the red knight, Sir Persant's
brother, that was a knight of the castle, and he encountered with Sir
Ector de Maris, and either smote other so hard that both their horses
and they fell to the earth. And then came in the red knight of the red
lawns, and Sir Gareth, from the castle, and there encountered with them
Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Bleoberis, and there the red knight and Sir
Bors smote other so hard that their spears brast, and their horses fell
groveling to the earth. Then Sir Bleoberis brake his spear upon Sir
Gareth, but of that stroke Sir Bleoberis fell to the earth. When Sir
Galihodin saw that, he bad Sir Gareth keep him, and Sir Gareth smote
him to the earth. Then Sir Galihud gat a spear to avenge his brother,
and in the same wise Sir Gareth served him, and Sir Dinadan and his
brother La Cote Male Taile, and Sir Sagramor le Desirous, and Sir
Dodinas le Savage; all these he bare down with one spear. When king
Agwisance of Ireland saw Sir Gareth fare so he marvelled what he might
be, that one time seemed green, and another time, at his again coming,
he seemed blue. And thus at every course that he rode to and fro he
changed his colour, so that there might neither king nor knight have
ready cognisance of him. Then Sir Agwisance the king of Ireland
encountered with Sir Gareth, and there Sir Gareth smote him from his
horse, saddle and all. And then came king Carados of Scotland, and Sir
Gareth smote him down, horse and man. And in the same wise he served
king Uriens of the land of Gore. And then there came in Sir Bagdemagus,
and Sir Gareth smote him down horse and man to the earth. And
Bagdemagus's son Meliganus brake a spear upon Sir Gareth mightily and
knightly. And then Sir Galahault the noble prince cried on high, Knight
with the many colours, well hast thou justed; now make thee ready that
I may just with thee. Sir Gareth heard him, and he gat a great spear,
and so they encountered together, and there the prince brake his spear:
but Sir Gareth smote him upon the left side of the helm, that he reeled
here and there, and he had fallen down had not his men recovered him.
Truly, said king Arthur, that knight with the many colours is a good
knight. Wherefore the king called unto him Sir Launcelot, and prayed
him to encounter with that knight. Sir, said Launcelot, I may well find
in my heart for to forbear him as at this time, for he hath had travail
enough this day, and when a good knight doth so well upon some day, it
is no good knight's part to let him of his worship, and, namely, when
he seeth a knight hath done so great labour: for peradventure, said Sir
Launcelot, his quarrel is here this day, and peradventure he is best
beloved with this lady of all that be here, for I see well he paineth
himself and enforceth him to do great deeds, and therefore, said Sir
Launcelot, as for me, this day he shall have the honour; though it lay
in my power to put him from it, I would not.


CHAPTER XXIX.
-------------

_Yet of the said Tournament._

Then when this was done, there was drawing of swords; and then there
began a sore tournament. And there did Sir Lamorak marvellous deeds of
arms, and betwixt Sir Lamorak and Sir Ironside, that was the red knight
of the red lawns, there was a strong battle, and betwixt Sir Palamides
and Bleoberis was a strong battle; and Sir Gawaine and Sir Tristram
met, and there Sir Gawaine had the worst, for he pulled Sir Gawaine
from his horse, and there he was long upon foot and defouled. Then came
in Sir Launcelot, and he smote Sir Turquine, and he him, and then came
Sir Carados his brother, and both at once they assailed him, and he, as
the most noblest knight of the world, worshipfully fought with them
both, that all men wondered of the nobleness of Sir Launcelot. And then
came in Sir Gareth and knew that it was Sir Launcelot that fought with
those two perilous knights. And then Sir Gareth came with his good
horse and hurtled them in sunder, and no stroke would he smite to Sir
Launcelot. That espied Sir Launcelot, and deemed it should be the good
knight Sir Gareth; and then Sir Gareth rode here and there, and smote
on the right hand and on the left hand, that all the folk might well
espy where that he rode. And by fortune he met with his brother Sir
Gawaine, and there he put Sir Gawaine to the worse, for he put off his
helm; and so he served five or six knights of the Round Table, that all
men said he put him in the most pain, and best he did his devoir. For
when Sir Tristram beheld him how he first justed and after fought so
well with a sword, then he rode unto Sir Ironside and to Sir Persant of
Inde, and asked them by their faith, What manner a knight is yonder
knight that seemeth in so many divers colours; truly, me seemeth, said
Tristram, that he putteth himself in great pain, for he never ceaseth.
Wot ye not what he is? said Sir Ironside. No, said Sir Tristram. Then
shall ye know that this is he that loveth the lady of the castle, and
she him again; and this is he that won me when I besieged the lady of
this castle, and this is he that won Sir Persant of Inde and his three
brethren. What is his name, said Sir Tristram, and of what blood is he
come? He was called in the court of king Arthur Beaumains, but his name
is Sir Gareth of Orkney, brother to Sir Gawaine. By my head, said Sir
Tristram, he is a good knight, and a big man of arms, and if he be
young he shall prove a full noble knight. He is but a child, they all
said; and of Sir Launcelot he was made knight. Therefore he is mickle
the better, said Tristram. And then Sir Tristram, Sir Ironside, Sir
Persant, and his brother, rode together for to help Sir Gareth, and
then there were given many strong strokes. And then Sir Gareth rode out
on the one side to amend his helm. And then said his dwarf, Take me
your ring, that ye lose it not while that ye drink. And so when he had
drunk, he gat on his helm, and eagerly took his horse and rode into the
field, and left his ring with his dwarf, and the dwarf was glad the
ring was from him, for then he wist well he should be known. And then
when Sir Gareth was in the field, all folks saw him well and plainly
that he was in yellow colours, and there he rashed off helms, and
pulled down knights, that king Arthur had marvel what knight he was,
for the king saw by his hair that it was the same knight.


CHAPTER XXX.
------------

_How Sir Gareth was espied by the heralds, and how he escaped out of
the field._

But before he was in so many colours, and now he is but in one colour,
that is yellow: now go, said king Arthur unto divers heralds, and ride
about him, and espy what manner knight he is, for I have asked of many
knights this day that be upon his party, and all say they know him not.
And so an herald rode nigh Gareth as he could, and there he saw written
about his helm in gold, This helm is Sir Gareth's of Orkney. Then the
herald cried as he were wood, and many heralds with him, This is Sir
Gareth of Orkney, in the yellow arms, that all kings and knights of
Arthur's beheld him and awaited, and then they pressed all to behold
him: and ever the heralds cried, This is Sir Gareth of Orkney, king
Lot's son. And when Sir Gareth espied that he was discovered, then he
doubled his strokes, and smote down Sir Sagramore, and his brother Sir
Gawaine. O brother, said Sir Gawaine, I wend ye would not have stricken
me. So when he heard him say so, he thrang here and there, and so with
great pain he gat out of the press, and there he met with his dwarf. O
boy, said Sir Gareth, thou hast beguiled me foul this day that thou
kept my ring. Give it me anon again, that I may hide my body withal;
and so he took it him. And then they all wist not where he was become;
and Sir Gawaine had in manner espied where Sir Gareth rode, and then he
rode after with all his might. That espied Sir Gareth, and rode lightly
into the forest, that Sir Gawaine wist not where he was become. And
when Sir Gareth wist that Sir Gawaine was past, he asked the dwarf of
best counsel. Sir, said the dwarf, me seemeth it were best, now that ye
are escaped from spying, that ye send my lady dame Liones her ring. It
is well advised, said Sir Gareth; now have it here, and bear it to her,
and say that I recommend me unto her good grace, and say her I will
come when I may, and I pray her to be true and faithful to me, as I
will be to her. Sir, said the dwarf, it shall be done as ye command:
and so he rode his way, and did his errand unto the lady. Then she
said, Where is my knight Sir Gareth? Madam, said the dwarf, he bad me
say that he would not be long from you. And so lightly the dwarf came
again unto Sir Gareth, that would fain have had a lodging, for he had
need to be reposed. And then fell there a thunder and a rain, as heaven
and earth should go together. And Sir Gareth was not a little weary,
for of all that day he had but little rest, neither his horse nor he.
So this Sir Gareth rode so long in that forest until the night came.
And ever it lightened and thundered, as it had been wood. At the last
by fortune he came to a castle, and there he heard the waits upon the
walls.


CHAPTER XXXI.
-------------

_How Sir Gareth came to a castle where he was well lodged, and how he
justed with a knight and he slew him._

Then Sir Gareth rode unto the barbican of the castle, and prayed the
porter fair to let him into the castle. The porter answered ungoodly
again, and said, Thou gettest no lodging here. Fair sir, say not so,
for I am a knight of king Arthur's, and pray the lord or the lady of
this castle to give me harbour for the love of king Arthur. Then the
porter went unto the duchess, and told her how there was a knight of
king Arthur's would have harbour. Let him in, said the duchess, for I
will see that knight, and for king Arthur's sake he shall not be
harbourless. Then she went up into a tower over the gate, with great
torch light. When Sir Gareth saw that torch light, he cried on high,
Whether thou be lord or lady, giant or champion, I take no force, so
that I may have harbour this night, and if it be so that I must needs
fight, spare me not to morn when I have rested me, for both I and my
horse be weary. Sir knight, said the lady, thou speakest knightly and
boldly, but wit thou well that the lord of this castle loveth not king
Arthur, nor none of his court, for my lord hath ever been against him,
and therefore thou were better not to come within this castle. For and
thou come in this night, thou must come in under such form, that
wheresoever thou meet my lord, by lane, or by street, thou must yield
thee to him as prisoner. Madam, said Sir Gareth, what is your lord, and
what is his name? Sir, my lord's name is the duke de la Rowse. Well,
madam, said Sir Gareth, I shall promise you in what place I meet your
lord, I shall yield me unto him and to his good grace, with that I
understand he will do me no harm: and if I understand that he will,
will I release myself and I can with my spear and with my sword. Ye say
well, said the duchess, and then she let the draw-bridge down. And so
he rode into the hall, and there he alight, and his horse was led into
a stable, and in the hall he unarmed him and said, Madam, I will not
out of this hall this night; and when it is day-light let see who will
have ado with me, he shall find me ready. Then was he set unto supper,
and had many good dishes. Then Sir Gareth list well to eat, and
knightly he ate his meat, and eagerly; there was many a fair lady by
him, and some of them said they never saw a goodlier man, nor so well
of eating. Then they made him passing good cheer. And shortly when he
had supped, his bed was made there; so he rested him all night. And on
the morn he heard mass, and broke his fast, and took his leave at the
duchess, and at them all, and thanked her goodly of her lodging, and of
his good cheer. And then she asked him his name. Madam, said he, truly,
my name is Gareth of Orkney, and some men call me Beaumains. Then knew
she well it was the same knight that fought for dame Liones. So Sir
Gareth departed, and rode up into a mountain, and there met him a
knight, his name was Sir Bendelaine, and said to Sir Gareth, Thou shalt
not pass this way, for either thou shalt just with me, or be my
prisoner. Then will I just, said Sir Gareth. And so they let their
horses run, and there Sir Gareth smote him throughout the body, and Sir
Bendelaine rode forth to his castle there beside, and there died. So
Sir Gareth would have rested him, and he came riding to Bendelaine's
castle. Then his knights and his servants espied that it was he that
had slain their lord. Then they armed twenty good men, and came out and
assailed Sir Gareth, and so he had no spear, but his sword, and put his
shield afore him, and there they brake their spears upon him, and they
assailed him passingly sore. But ever Sir Gareth defended him as a
knight.


CHAPTER XXXII.
--------------

_How Sir Gareth fought with a knight that held within his castle thirty
ladies, and how he slew him._

So when they saw that they might not overcome him, they rode from him
and took their counsel to slay his horse, and so they came in upon Sir
Gareth, and with spears they slew his horse, and then they assailed him
hard. But when he was on foot there was none that he fought but he gave
him such a buffet that he did never recover. So he slew them by one and
one till they were but four, and there they fled, and Sir Gareth took a
good horse that was one of theirs, and rode his way. Then he rode a
great pace till that he came to a castle, and there he heard much
mourning of ladies and gentlewomen. So there came by him a page: What
noise is this, said Sir Gareth, that I hear within this castle? Sir
knight, said the page, here be within this castle thirty ladies, and
all they be widows, for here is a knight that waiteth daily upon this
castle, and his name is the brown knight without pity, and he is the
most perilous knight that now liveth. And, therefore, sir, said the
page, I rede you flee. Nay, said Sir Gareth, I will not flee, though
thou be afeard of him. And then the page saw where came the brown
knight. Lo, said the page, yonder he cometh. Let me deal with him, said
Sir Gareth. And when either of other had a sight, they let their horses
run, and the brown knight brake his spear, and Sir Gareth smote him
throughout the body, that he overthrew him to the ground stark dead. So
Sir Gareth rode into the castle, and prayed the ladies that he might
repose him. Alas, said the ladies, ye may not be lodged here. Make him
good cheer, said the page, for this knight hath slain your enemy. Then
they all made him good cheer as lay in their power. But wit ye well
they made him good cheer, for they might none otherwise do, for they
were but poor. And so on the morn he went to mass, and there he saw the
thirty ladies kneel, and lay groveling upon divers tombs making great
dole and sorrow. Then Sir Gareth wist well that in the tombs lay their
lords. Fair ladies, said Sir Gareth, ye must at the next feast of
Pentecost be at the court of king Arthur, and say that I Sir Gareth
sent you thither. We shall do this, said the ladies. So he departed,
and by fortune he came to a mountain, and there he found a goodly
knight that bad him, Abide Sir knight, and just with me. What are ye?
said Sir Gareth. My name is, said he, the duke de la Rowse. Ah! Sir, ye
are the same knight that I lodged once in your castle, and there I made
promise unto your lady that I should yield me unto you. Ah! said the
duke, art thou that proud knight that proffered to fight with my
knights? therefore make thee ready, for I will have ado with thee. So
they let their horses run, and there Sir Gareth smote the duke down
from his horse. But the duke lightly avoided his horse, and dressed his
shield, and drew his sword, and bad Sir Gareth alight and fight with
him. So he did alight, and they did great battle together more than an
hour, and either hurt other full sore. At the last Sir Gareth gat the
duke to the earth, and would have slain him, and then he yielded him to
him. Then must ye go, said Sir Gareth, unto Sir Arthur my lord at the
next feast, and say that I Sir Gareth of Orkney sent you unto him. It
shall be done, said the duke, and I will do to you homage and fealty
with an hundred knights with me, and all the days of my life to do you
service where ye will command me.


CHAPTER XXXIII.
---------------

_How Sir Gawaine and Sir Gareth fought each against other, and how they
knew each other by the damsel Linet._

So the duke departed, and Sir Gareth stood there alone, and there he
saw an armed knight coming toward him. Then Sir Gareth took the duke's
shield and mounted upon horseback, and so without bidding they ran
together as it had been the thunder. And there that knight hurt Sir
Gareth under the side with his spear. And then they alight and drew
their swords, and gave great strokes, that the blood trailed to the
ground. And so they fought two hours. At the last there came the damsel
Linet, that some men call the damsel Savage, and she came riding upon
an ambling mule, and there she cried all on high, Sir Gawaine, Sir
Gawaine, leave thy fighting with thy brother Sir Gareth. And when he
heard her say so he threw away his shield and his sword, and ran to Sir
Gareth and took him in his arms, and then kneeled down and asked him
mercy. What are ye, said Sir Gareth, that right now were so strong and
so mighty, and now so suddenly yield you to me? O Gareth, I am your
brother Sir Gawaine, that for your sake have had great sorrow and
labour. Then Sir Gareth unlaced his helm, and kneeled down to him and
asked him mercy. Then they rose both, and embraced either other in
their arms, and wept a great while or they might speak, and either of
them gave other the prize of the battle. And there were many kind words
between them. Alas, my fair brother, said Sir Gawaine, perdy I ought of
right to worship you and ye were not my brother, for ye have worshipped
king Arthur and all his court, for ye have sent him more worshipful
knights this twelvemonth than six the best of the Round Table have
done, except Sir Launcelot. Then came the damsel Savage, that was the
lady Linet that rode with Sir Gareth so long, and there she did stanch
Sir Gareth's wounds and Sir Gawaine's. Now what will ye do? said the
damsel Savage; me seemeth it were well done that Arthur had tidings of
you both, for your horses are so bruised that they may not bear. Now,
fair damsel, said Sir Gawaine, I pray you ride unto my lord, mine uncle
king Arthur, and tell him what adventure is to me betid here, and I
suppose he will not tarry long. Then she took her mule, and lightly she
came to king Arthur that was but two miles thence, and when she had
told him the tidings, the king bad get him a palfrey. And when he was
upon his back he bad the lords and ladies come after who that would:
and there was saddling and bridling of queens' horses, and princes'
horses, and well was him that soonest might be ready. So when the king
came there as they were, he saw Sir Gawaine and Sir Gareth sit upon a
little hill side, and then the king avoided his horse. And when he came
nigh Sir Gareth he would have spoken but he might not, and therewith he
sank down in a swoon for gladness. And so they start unto their uncle,
and required him of his good grace to be of good comfort. Wit ye well
the king made great joy, and many a piteous complaint he made unto Sir
Gareth, and ever he wept as he had been a child. With that came his
mother the queen of Orkney, dame Morgause, and when she saw Sir Gareth
readily in the visage, she might not weep, but suddenly fell down in a
swoon, and lay there a great while like as she had been dead. And then
Sir Gareth recomforted his mother in such a wise that she recovered,
and made good cheer. Then the king commanded that all manner of knights
that were under his obeisance should make their lodging right there for
the love of his nephews. And so it was done, and all manner of
purveyance purveyed that there lacked nothing that might be gotten of
tame nor wild for gold or silver. And then by the means of the damsel
Savage Sir Gawaine and Sir Gareth were healed of their wounds, and
there they sojourned eight days. Then said king Arthur unto the damsel
Savage, I marvel that your sister dame Liones cometh not here to me,
and in especial that she cometh not to visit her knight, my nephew Sir
Gareth, that hath had so much travail for her love. My lord, said the
damsel Linet, ye must of your good grace hold her excused, for she
knoweth not that my lord Sir Gareth is here. Go then for her, said king
Arthur, that we may be appointed what is best to be done, according
unto the pleasure of my nephew. Sir, said the damsel, that shall be
done, and so she rode unto her sister. And as lightly as she might she
made her ready, and she came on the morn with her brother Sir
Gringamore, and with her forty knights. And so when she was come, she
had all the cheer that might be done, both of the king and of many
other kings and queens.


CHAPTER XXXIV.
--------------

_How Sir Gareth acknowledged that they loved each other to king Arthur,
and of the appointment of their wedding._

And among all these ladies she was named the fairest and peerless. Then
when Sir Gareth saw her, there was many a goodly look and goodly words,
that all men of worship had joy to behold them. Then came king Arthur
and many other kings, and dame Guenever and the queen of Orkney. And
there the king asked his nephew Sir Gareth whether he would have that
lady to his wife? My lord, wit you well that I love her above all
ladies living. Now, fair lady, said king Arthur, what say ye? Most
noble king, said dame Liones, wit you well that my lord Sir Gareth is
to me more lever to have and hold as my husband, than any king or
prince that is christened, and if I may not have him I promise you I
will never have none. For, my lord Arthur, said dame Liones, wit ye
well he is my first love, and he shall be the last: and if ye will
suffer him to have his will and free choice, I dare say he will have
me. That is truth, said Sir Gareth, and I have not you and hold not you
as my wife, there shall never lady nor gentlewoman rejoice me. What
nephew, said the king, is the wind in that door! for wit ye well I
would not for the stint of my crown to be causer to withdraw your
hearts, and wit ye well ye cannot love so well but I shall rather
increase it than distress it. And also ye shall have my love and my
lordship in the uttermost wise that may lie in my power. And in the
same wise said Sir Gareth's mother. Then was there made a provision for
the day of marriage, and by the king's advice it was provided that it
should be at Michaelmas following, at Kinkenadon by the sea-side, for
there is a plentiful country. And so it was cried in all the places
through the realm. And then Sir Gareth sent his summons unto all these
knights and ladies that he had won in battle tofore, that they should
be at his day of marriage at Kinkenadon by the sands. And then dame
Liones and the damsel Linet, with Sir Gringamore, rode to their castle,
and a goodly and a rich ring she gave to Sir Gareth, and he gave her
another. And king Arthur gave her a rich bee of gold, and so she
departed. And king Arthur and his fellowship rode toward Kinkenadon,
and Sir Gareth brought his lady on the way, and so came to the king
again and rode with him. Oh the great cheer that Sir Launcelot made of
Sir Gareth and he of him: for there was never no knight that Sir Gareth
loved so well as he did Sir Launcelot, and ever for the most part he
would be in Sir Launcelot's company: for after Sir Gareth had espied
Sir Gawaine's conditions, he withdrew himself from his brother Sir
Gawaine's fellowship, for he was vengeable, and where he hated he would
be avenged with murder, and that hated Sir Gareth.


CHAPTER XXXV.
-------------

_Of the great royalty, and what officers were made at the feast of the
wedding, and of the justs at the feast._

So it drew fast to Michaelmas, and thither came dame Liones the lady of
the castle perilous and her sister dame Linet, with Sir Gringamore
their brother with them: for he had the conduct of these ladies. And
there they were lodged at the devise of king Arthur. And upon
Michaelmas-day the bishop of Canterbury made the wedding betwixt Sir
Gareth and the lady Liones with great solemnity. And king Arthur made
Gaheris to wed the damsel Savage, that was dame Linet; and king Arthur
made Sir Agravaine to wed dame Liones' niece, a fair lady, her name was
dame Laurel. And so when this solemnization was done, then there came
in the green knight Sir Pertolope with thirty knights, and there he did
homage and fealty unto Sir Gareth, and these knights to hold of him for
evermore. Also Sir Pertolope said, I pray you that at this feast I may
be your chamberlain. With a good will, said Sir Gareth, sith it liketh
you to take so simple an office. Then came in the red knight with
threescore knights with him, and did to Sir Gareth homage and fealty,
and all those knights to hold of him for evermore, and then this Sir
Perimones prayed Sir Gareth to grant him to be his chief butler at that
high feast. I will well, said Sir Gareth, that ye have this office and
it were better. Then came in Sir Persant of Inde with an hundred
knights with him, and there he did homage and fealty unto Sir Gareth,
and all his knights should do him service, and hold their lands of him
for ever; and there he prayed Sir Gareth to make him his sewer chief at
the feast. I will well, said Sir Gareth, that ye have it and it were
better. Then came in the duke de la Rowse with an hundred knights with
him, and there he did homage and fealty unto Sir Gareth, and so to hold
their lands of him for ever; and he required Sir Gareth that he might
serve him of the wine that day at the feast. I will well, said Sir
Gareth, and it were better. Then came in the red knight of the red
lawns, that was Sir Ironside, and he brought with him three hundred
knights, and there he did homage and fealty, and all these knights to
hold their lands of him for ever, and then he asked Sir Gareth to be
his carver. I will well, said Sir Gareth, and it please you. Then came
into the court thirty ladies, and all they seemed widows, and those
thirty ladies brought with them many fair gentlewomen; and all they
kneeled down at once unto king Arthur and to Sir Gareth, and there all
those ladies told the king how Sir Gareth had delivered them from the
dolorous tower, and slew the brown knight without pity; and therefore
we and our heirs for evermore will do homage unto Sir Gareth of Orkney.
So then the kings and queens, princes, earls and barons, and many bold
knights went unto meat, and well may ye wit that there was all manner
of meat plenteously, all manner revels and games, with all manner of
minstrelsy that was used in those days. Also there was great justs
three days. But the king would not suffer Sir Gareth to just because of
his new bride: for as the French book saith that dame Liones desired
the king that none that were wedded should just at that feast. So the
first day there justed Sir Lamorak de Galis, for he overthrew thirty
knights and did passing marvellously deeds of arms. And then king
Arthur made Sir Persant of Inde and his two brethren knights of the
Round Table, to their lives' end, and gave them great lands. Also the
second day there justed Tristram best, and he overthrew forty knights,
and did there marvellous deeds of arms. And there king Arthur made
Ironside, that was the red knight of the red lawns, a knight of the
Table Round unto his life's end, and gave him great lands. The third
day there justed Sir Launcelot du Lake, and he overthrew fifty knights
and did many marvellous deeds of arms, that all men wondered on him.
And there king Arthur made the duke de la Rowse a knight of the Round
Table to his life's end, and gave him great lands to spend. But when
these justs were done, Sir Lamorak and Sir Tristram departed suddenly
and would not be known, for the which king Arthur and all the court
were sore displeased. And so they held the court forty days with great
solemnity. And this Sir Gareth was a noble knight, and a well ruled,
and fair languaged.


End of the Seventh Book.
========================
