The Ninth Book.
===============

CHAPTER I.
----------

_How a young man came into the court of king Arthur, and how Sir Kay
called him in scorn La Cote Male Taile._

At the court of king Arthur there came a young man and bigly made, and
he was richly beseen, and he desired to be made knight of the king, but
his over garment sat overthwartly, howbeit it was rich cloth of gold.
What is your name? said king Arthur. Sir, said he, my name is Breunor
le Noire, and within short space ye shall know that I am of good kin.
It may well be, said Sir Kay the seneschal, but in mockage ye shall be
called La Cote Male Taile, that is as much as to say, the evil-shapen
coat. It is a great thing that thou askest, said the king; and for what
cause wearest thou that rich coat? tell me; for I can well think for
some cause it is. Sir, said he, I had a father a noble knight, and as
he rode on hunting, upon a day it happed him to lay him down to sleep.
And there came a knight that had been long his enemy. And when he saw
he was fast on sleep, he all to-hewed him; and this same coat had my
father on the same time, and that maketh this coat to sit so evil upon
me, for the strokes be on it as I found it, and never shall be amended
for me. Thus to have my father's death in remembrance I wear this coat
till I be revenged; and because ye are called the most noblest king in
the world I come to you that ye should make me knight. Sir, said Sir
Lamorak and Sir Gaheris, it were well done to make him knight, for him
beseemeth well of person and of countenance, that he shall prove a good
man, and a good knight and a mighty; for Sir, and ye be remembered,
even such one was Sir Launcelot du Lake when he came first into this
court, and full few of us knew from whence he came, and now he is
proved the most man of worship in the world, and all your court and all
your Round Table is by Sir Launcelot worshipped and amended more than
by any knight now living. That is truth, said the king, and to-morrow
at your request I shall make him knight. So on the morrow there was an
hart found, and thither rode king Arthur with a company of his knights
to slay the hart. And this young man that Sir Kay named La Cote Male
Taile was there left behind with queen Guenever, and by sudden
adventure there was an horrible lion kept in a strong tower of stone,
and it happened that he at that time brake loose, and came hurling
afore the queen and her knights. And when the queen saw the lion, she
cried, and fled, and prayed her knights to rescue her. And there was
none of them all but twelve that abode, and all the other fled. Then
said La Cote Male Taile, Now I see well that all coward knights be not
dead: and therewithal he drew his sword and dressed him afore the lion.
And that lion gaped wide, and came upon him ramping to have slain him.
And he then smote him in the midst of the head such a mighty stroke
that it clave his head in sunder, and dashed to the earth. Then was it
told the queen how that the young man that Sir Kay named by scorn La
Cote Male Taile had slain the lion. With that the king came home. And
when the queen told him of that adventure he was well pleased, and
said, Upon pain of mine head he shall prove a noble man, and a faithful
knight, and true of his promise. Then the king forthwithal made him
knight. Now Sir, said this young knight, I require you and all the
knights of your court, that ye call me by none other name but La Cote
Male Taile; insomuch as Sir Kay so hath named me, so will I be called.
I assent me well thereto, said the king.


CHAPTER II.
-----------

_How a damsel came unto the court and desired a knight to take on him
an inquest, which La Cote Male Taile emprized._

Then that same day there came a damsel into the king's court, and she
brought with her a great black shield, with a white hand in the midst
holding a sword. Other picture was there none in that shield. When king
Arthur saw her, he asked her from whence she came, and what she would.
Sir, she said, I have ridden long and many a day with this shield many
ways, and for this cause I am come to your court:--There was a good
knight that owned this shield, and this knight had undertaken a great
deed of arms to achieve it, and so it misfortuned him another strong
knight met with him by sudden adventure, and there they fought long,
and either wounded other passing sore, and they were so weary that they
left that battle even hand. So this knight that owned this shield saw
none other way but he must die; and then he commanded me to bear this
shield to the court of king Arthur, he requiring and praying some good
knight to take this shield, and that he would fulfil the quest that he
was in. Now what say ye to this quest? said king Arthur. Is there any
of you here that will take upon him to weld this shield? Then was there
not one that would speak one word. Then Sir Kay took the shield in his
hands. Sir knight, said the damsel, what is your name? Wit ye well,
said he, my name is Sir Kay the seneschal, that widewhere is known.
Sir, said that damsel, lay down that shield, for wit ye well it falleth
not for you, for he must be a better knight than ye that shall weld
this shield. Damsel, said Sir Kay, wit ye well I took this shield in my
hands by your leave for to behold it, not to that intent, but go
wheresoever thou wilt, for I will not go with you. Then the damsel
stood still a great while, and beheld many of those knights. Then spake
the knight La Cote Male Taile, Fair damsel, I will take the shield and
that adventure upon me, so I wist I should know whither ward my journey
might be, for because I was this day made knight I would take this
adventure upon me. What is your name, fair young man? said the damsel.
My name is, said he, La Cote Male Taile. Well mayest thou be called so,
said the damsel, the knight with the evil-shapen coat, but and thou be
so hardy to take upon thee to bear that shield and to follow me, wit
thou well thy skin shall be as well hewn as thy coat. As for that, said
La Cote Male Taile, when I am so hewn I will ask you no salve to heal
me withal. And forthwithal there came into the court two squires, and
brought him great horses and his armour and his spears, and anon he was
armed, and took his leave. I would not by my will, said the king, that
ye took upon you that hard adventure. Sir, said he, this adventure is
mine, and the first that ever I took upon me, and that will I follow
whatsoever come of me. Then that damsel departed, and La Cote Male
Taile followed first after. And within a while he overtook the damsel.
And anon she missaid him in the foullest manner.


CHAPTER III.
------------

_How La Cote Male Taile overthrew Sir Dagonet the king's fool, and of
the rebuke that he had of the damsel._

Then Sir Kay ordained Sir Dagonet, king Arthur's fool, to follow after
La Cote Male Taile, and there Sir Kay ordained that Sir Dagonet was
horsed and armed, and bad him follow La Cote Male Taile and proffer him
to just, and so he did, and when he saw La Cote Male Taile he cried and
bad him make him ready to just. So Sir La Cote Male Taile smote Sir
Dagonet over his horse croup. Then the damsel mocked La Cote Male
Taile, and said, Fie for shame, now art thou shamed in Arthur's court
when they send a fool to have ado with thee, and specially at thy first
justs. Thus she rode long and chid. And within a while there came Sir
Bleoberis the good knight, and there he justed with La Cote Male Taile,
and there Sir Bleoberis smote him so sore that horse and all fell to
the earth. Then La Cote Male Taile arose up lightly and dressed his
shield and drew his sword, and would have done battle to the utterance,
for he was wood wroth. Not so, said Bleoberis de Ganis, as at this time
I will not fight upon foot. Then the damsel Maledisant rebuked him in
the foullest manner, and bad him, turn again coward. Ah damsel, he
said, I pray you of mercy to missay me no more, my grief is enough
though ye give me no more. I call myself never the worse knight when a
mare's son faileth me, and also I count me never the worse knight for a
fall of Sir Bleoberis. So thus he rode with her two days, and by
fortune there came Sir Palamides and encountered with him, and he in
the same wise served him as did Bleoberis toforehand. What dost thou
here in my fellowship, said the damsel Maledisant, thou canst not sit
no knight nor withstand him one buffet, but if it were Sir Dagonet. Ah
fair damsel, I am not the worse to take a fall of Sir Palamides, and
yet great disworship have I none, for neither Bleoberis nor yet
Palamides would not fight with me on foot. As for that, said the
damsel, wit thou well they have disdain and scorn to light off their
horses to fight with such a mean knight as thou art. So in the
meanwhile there came Sir Mordred, Sir Gawaine's brother, and so he fell
in the fellowship with the damsel Maledisant. And then they came afore
the castle Orgulous, and there was such a custom that there might no
knight come by that castle but either he must just or be prisoner, or
at the least to lose his horse and his harness. And there came out two
knights against them, and Sir Mordred justed with the foremost, and
that knight of the castle smote Sir Mordred down off his horse. And
then anon La Cote Male Taile justed with that other, and either of them
smote other down, horse and all to the earth. And when they avoided
their horses, then either of them took other's horses. And then La Cote
Male Taile rode into that knight that smote down Sir Mordred, and
justed with him; and there Sir La Cote Male Taile hurt and wounded him
passing sore, and put him from his horse as he had been dead. So he
turned unto him that met him afore, and he took the flight toward the
castle, and Sir La Cote Male Taile rode after him into the castle
Orgulous, and there La Cote Male Taile slew him.


CHAPTER IV.
-----------

_How La Cote Male Taile fought against an hundred knights, and how he
escaped by the mean of a lady._

And anon there came an hundred knights about him and assailed him; and
when he saw his horse should be slain he alight and voided his horse,
and put the bridle under his feet, and so put him out of the gate. And
when he had so done, he hurled in among them, and dressed his back unto
a lady's chamber-wall, thinking himself that he had lever die there
with worship than to abide the rebukes of the damsel Maledisant. And in
the mean time as he stood and fought, that lady whose was the chamber,
went out slily at her postern, and without the gates she found La Cote
Male Taile's horse, and lightly she gat him by the bridle and tied him
to the postern. And then she went unto her chamber slily again for to
behold how that one knight fought against an hundred knights. And so
when she had beheld him long, she went to a window behind his back and
said, Thou knight thou fightest wonderly well, but for all that at the
last thou must needs die, but and thou canst through thy mighty prowess
win unto yonder postern, for there have I fastened thy horse to abide
thee; but wit thou well thou must think on thy worship and think not to
die, for thou mayest not win unto that postern without thou do nobly
and mightily. When La Cote Male Taile heard her say so, he griped his
sword in his hands, and put his shield fair afore him, and through the
thickest press he thrulled through them. And when he came to the
postern he found there ready four knights, and at two the first strokes
he slew two of the knights, and the other fled, and so he won his horse
and rode from them. And all as it was, it was rehearsed in king
Arthur's court, how he slew twelve knights within the castle Orgulous.
And so he rode on his way. And in the mean while the damsel said to Sir
Mordred, I ween my foolish knight be either slain or taken prisoner.
Then were they ware where he came riding. And when he was come unto
them, he told all how he had sped, and escaped in despite of them all,
and some of the best of them will tell no tales. Thou liest falsely,
said the damsel, that dare I make good, but as a fool and a dastard to
all knighthood they have let thee pass. That may ye prove, said La Cote
Male Taile. With that she sent a courier of hers that rode alway with
her, for to know the truth of this deed. And so he rode thither
lightly, and asked how and in what manner that Sir La Cote Male Taile
was escaped out of the castle. Then all the knights cursed him and said
that he was fiend and no man; for he hath slain here twelve of our best
knights, and we wend unto this day that it had been too much for Sir
Launcelot du Lake, or for Sir Tristram de Liones. And in despite of us
all he is departed from us, and maugre our heads.

With this answer the courier departed, and came to Maledisant his lady,
and told her all how Sir La Cote Male Taile had sped at the castle
Orgulous. Then she smote down her head, and said little. By my head,
said Sir Mordred to the damsel, ye are greatly to blame so to rebuke
him, for I warn you plainly he is a good knight, and I doubt not but he
shall prove a noble knight, but as yet he may not sit sure on
horseback: for he that shall be a good horseman it must come of usage
and exercise. But when he cometh to the strokes of his sword he is then
noble and mighty, and that saw Sir Bleoberis and Sir Palamides, for wit
ye well they are wily men of arms, and anon they know when they see a
young knight by his riding, how they are sure to give him a fall from
his horse or a great buffet. But for the most part they will not light
on foot with young knights, for they are wight and strongly armed. For
in likewise Sir Launcelot du Lake when he was first made knight he was
often put to the worse upon horseback, but ever upon foot he recovered
his renown, and slew and defoiled many knights of the Round Table. And
therefore the rebukes that Sir Launcelot did to many knights causeth
them that be men of prowess to beware, for often I have seen the old
proved knights rebuked and slain by them that were but young beginners.
Thus they rode sure talking by the way together.

Here leave we off a while of this tale, and speak we of Sir Launcelot
du Lake.


CHAPTER V.
----------

_How Sir Launcelot came to the court and heard of La Cote Male Taile,
and how he followed after him, and how La Cote Male Taile was
prisoner._

That when he was come to the court of king Arthur, then heard he tell
of the young knight La Cote Male Taile, how he slew the lion, and how
he took upon him the adventure of the black shield, the which was named
at that time the hardiest adventure of the world. Truly, said Sir
Launcelot unto many of his fellows, it was shame to all the noble
knights to suffer such a young knight to take such adventure upon him
for his destruction: for I will that ye wit, said Sir Launcelot, that
that damsel Maledisant hath borne that shield many a day for to seek
the most proved knights, and that was she that Breuse Sance Pité took
that shield from her, and after Tristram de Liones rescued that shield
from him and gave it to the damsel again. A little afore that time Sir
Tristram fought with my nephew Sir Blamor de Ganis for a quarrel that
was betwixt the king of Ireland and him. Then many knights were sorry
that Sir La Cote Male Taile was gone forth to that adventure. Truly,
said Sir Launcelot, I cast me to ride after him. And within seven days
Sir Launcelot overtook La Cote Male Taile. And then he saluted him and
the damsel Maledisant. And when Sir Mordred saw Sir Launcelot then he
left their fellowship. And so Sir Launcelot rode with them all a day,
and ever that damsel rebuked La Cote Male Taile, and then Sir Launcelot
answered for him; then she left off and rebuked Sir Launcelot. So this
mean time Sir Tristram sent by a damsel a letter unto Sir Launcelot
excusing him of the wedding of Isoud la Blanche Mains, and passing
courteously and gently Sir Tristram wrote unto Sir Launcelot, ever
beseeching him to be his good friend, and unto La Beale Isoud of
Cornwall, and that Sir Launcelot would excuse him if that ever he saw
her. And within short time said Sir Tristram that he would speak with
La Beale Isoud and with him right hastily. Then Sir Launcelot departed
from the damsel and from Sir La Cote Male Taile, for to oversee that
letter, and for to write another letter unto Sir Tristram de Liones.
And in the mean while La Cote Male Taile rode with the damsel until
they came unto a castle that hight Pendragon, and there were six
knights stood afore him, and one of them proffered to just with La Cote
Male Taile. And there La Cote Male Taile smote him over his horse
croup. And then the five knights set upon him all at once with their
spears, and there they smote La Cote Male Taile down, horse and man,
and then they alight suddenly, and set their hands upon him all at once
and took him prisoner, and so led him unto the castle and kept him as
prisoner. And on the morn Sir Launcelot arose and delivered the damsel
with letters unto Sir Tristram, and then he took his way after La Cote
Male Taile, and by the way upon a bridge there was a knight proffered
Sir Launcelot to just, and Sir Launcelot smote him down, and then they
fought upon foot a noble battle together, and a mighty. And at the last
Sir Launcelot smote him down groveling upon his hands and his knees;
and then that knight yielded him, and Sir Launcelot received him fair.
Sir, said the knight, I require thee tell me your name, for much my
heart giveth unto you. Nay, said Sir Launcelot, as at this time I will
not tell you my name, unless then that ye tell me your name. Certainly,
said the knight, my name is Sir Nerovens, that was made knight of my
lord Sir Launcelot du Lake. Ah, Nerovens de Lile, said Sir Launcelot, I
am right glad that ye are proved a good knight, for now wit ye well my
name is Sir Launcelot du Lake. Alas, said Nerovens de Lile, what have I
done. And therewithall flatling he fell to his feet, and would have
kissed them, but Sir Launcelot would not let him; and then either made
great joy of other. And then Sir Nerovens told Sir Launcelot that he
should not go by the castle of Pendragon, For there is a lord, a mighty
knight, and many knights with him, and this night I heard say that they
took a knight prisoner yesterday that rode with a damsel, and they say
he is a knight of the Round Table.


CHAPTER VI.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot fought with six knights, and after with Sir Brian,
and how he delivered the prisoners._

Ah, said Sir Launcelot, that knight is my fellow, and him shall I
rescue, or else I shall lose my life therefore. And therewithal he rode
fast till he came before the castle of Pendragon, and anon therewithal
there came six knights, and all made them ready to set upon Sir
Launcelot at once. Then Sir Launcelot feutred his spear, and smote the
foremost that he brake his back in sunder, and three of them hit and
three failed. And then Sir Launcelot past through them, and lightly he
turned in again, and smote another knight through the breast and
throughout the back, and more than an ell, and therewithal his spear
brake. So then all the remnant of the four knights drew their swords,
and lashed at Sir Launcelot, and at every stroke Sir Launcelot bestowed
so his strokes that at four strokes sundry they avoided their saddles,
passing sore wounded, and forthwithal he rode hurling into that castle.
And, anon the lord of the castle that was that time called Sir Brian de
les isles, the which was a noble man, and a great enemy unto king
Arthur, within awhile he was armed and upon horseback: and then they
feutred their spears, and hurled together so strongly that both their
horses rashed to the earth. And then they avoided their saddles, and
dressed their shields, and drew their swords, and flung together as
wood men, and there were many strokes given in a while. At the last Sir
Launcelot gave to Sir Brian such a buffet that he kneeled upon his
knees, and then Sir Launcelot rashed upon him, and with great force he
pulled him off his helm, and when Sir Brian saw that he should be
slain, he yielded him, and put him in his mercy and in his grace. Then
Sir Launcelot made him to deliver all his prisoners that he had within
his castle, and therein Sir Launcelot found of Arthur's knights thirty,
and forty ladies, and so he delivered them and then he rode his way.
And anon as La Cote Male Taile was delivered he gat his horse and his
harness, and his damsel Maledisant. The mean while Sir Nerovens, that
Sir Launcelot had fought withall afore at the bridge, he sent a damsel
after Sir Launcelot for to wit how he sped at the castle of Pendragon.
And then they within the castle marvelled what knight he was when Sir
Brian and his knights delivered all those prisoners. Have ye no marvel,
said the damsel, for the best knight in this world was here, and did
this tourney, and wit ye well, she said, it was Sir Launcelot. Then was
Sir Brian full glad, and so was his lady and all his knights that such
a man should win them. And when the damsel and La Cote Male Taile
understood that it was Sir Launcelot du Lake that had ridden with them
in fellowship, and that she remembered her how she had rebuked him and
called him coward, then was she passing heavy.


CHAPTER VII.
------------

_How Sir Launcelot met with the damsel named Maledisant, and how he
named her the damsel Bienpensant._

So then they took their horses and rode forth a pace after Sir
Launcelot. And within two mile they overtook him, and saluted him, and
thanked him, and the damsel cried Sir Launcelot mercy of her evil deed,
and saying, For now I know the flower of all knighthood is parted even
between Sir Tristram and you. For I have sought you my lord Sir
Launcelot, and Sir Tristram, long, and now I thank God I have met with
you; and once at Camelot, I met with Sir Tristram, and there he rescued
this black shield with the white hand holding a naked sword, which Sir
Breuse Sance Pité had taken away from me. Now, fair damsel, said Sir
Launcelot, who told you my name? Sir, said she, there came a damsel
from a knight that ye fought withall at the bridge, and she told me
your name was Sir Launcelot du Lake. Blame have she then, said Sir
Launcelot, but her lord Sir Nerovens hath told her. But damsel, said
Sir Launcelot, upon this covenant I will ride with you, so that ye will
not rebuke this knight Sir La Cote Male Taile no more, for he is a good
knight, and I doubt not he shall prove a noble knight, and for his
sake, and pity that he should not be destroyed, I followed him to
succour him in this great need. Ah, God thank you, said the damsel, for
now I will say unto you and to him both, I rebuked him never for no
hate that I hated him, but for great love that I had to him: for ever I
supposed that he had been too young and too tender to take upon him
these adventures, and, therefore by my will I would have driven him
away for jealousy that I had of his life; for it may be no young
knight's deed that shall achieve this adventure to the end. Perdy, said
Sir Launcelot, it is well said, and where ye are called the damsel
Maledisant, I will call you the damsel Bienpensant. And so they rode
forth a great while until they came to the border of the country of
Surluse, and there they found a fair village with a strong bridge like
a fortress. And when Sir Launcelot and they were at the bridge, there
start forth afore them of gentlemen and yeomen many that said, Fair
lords, ye may not pass this bridge and this fortress because of that
black shield that I see one of you bear, and therefore there shall not
pass but one of you at once; therefore choose which of you shall enter
within this bridge first. Then Sir Launcelot proffered himself first to
enter within this bridge. Sir, said La Cote Male Taile, I beseech you
let me enter first within this fortress, and if I may speed well I will
send for you, and if it happen that I be slain, there it goeth. And if
so be that I am a prisoner taken, then may ye rescue me. I am loth,
said Sir Launcelot, to let you pass this passage. Sir, said La Cote
Male Taile, I pray you let me put my body in this adventure. Now go
your way, said Sir Launcelot, and Jesu be your speed. So he entered,
and anon there met with him two brethren, the one hight Sir Plaine de
Force, and the other hight Sir Plaine de Amours; and anon they met with
Sir La Cote Male Taile, and first La Cote Male Taile smote down Sir
Plaine de Force, and soon after he smote down Plaine de Amours, and
then they dressed them to their shields and swords, and bad La Cote
Male Taile alight, and so he did, and there was dashing and foining
with swords, and so they began to assail full hard La Cote Male Taile,
and many great wounds they gave him upon his head and upon his breast
and upon his shoulders. And as he might ever among he gave sad strokes
again. And then the two brethren traced and traversed for to be of both
hands of Sir La Cote Male Taile, but he by fine force and knightly
prowess gat them afore him. And then when he felt himself so wounded
then he doubled his strokes and gave them so many wounds that he felled
them to the earth, and would have slain them had they not yielded them.
And right so Sir La Cote Male Taile took the best horse that there was
of them three, and so rode forth his way to the other fortress and
bridge, and there he met with the third brother, whose name was Sir
Plenorius, a full noble knight, and there they justed together, and
either smote other down horse and man to the earth. And then they
avoided their horses, and dressed their shields, and drew their swords,
and gave many sad strokes, and one while the one knight was afore on
the bridge, and another while the other. And thus they fought two hours
and more, and never rested, and ever Sir Launcelot and the damsel
beheld them. Alas, said the damsel, my knight fighteth passing sore and
over long. Now may ye see, said Sir Launcelot, that he is a noble
knight, for to consider his first battle, and his grievous wounds. And
even forth with all so wounded as he is, it is great marvel that he may
endure this long battle with that good knight.


CHAPTER VIII.
-------------

_How La Cote Male Taile was taken prisoner, and after rescued by Sir
Launcelot, and how Sir Launcelot overcame four brethren._

This mean while Sir La Cote Male Taile sank right down upon the earth,
what for-wounded and what for-bled he might not stand. Then the other
knight had pity of him, and said, Fair young knight, dismay you not,
for had ye been fresh when ye met with me, as I was, I well wot that I
should not have endured so long as ye have done, and therefore for your
noble deeds of arms I shall shew to you kindness and gentleness in all
that I may. And forth withal this noble knight Sir Plenorius took him
up in his arms, and led him into his tower. And then he commanded him
the wine, and made to search him, and to stop his bleeding wounds. Sir,
said La Cote Male Taile, withdraw you from me, and hie you to yonder
bridge again, for there will meet you another manner knight than ever I
was. Why, said Sir Plenorius, is there another manner knight behind of
your fellowship? Yea, said La Cote Male Taile, there is a much better
knight than I am. What is his name? said Plenorius. Ye shall not know
for me, said La Cote Male Taile. Well, said the knight, he shall be
encountered withal, whatsoever he be. Then Sir Plenorius heard a knight
call that said, Sir Plenorius, where art thou? either thou must deliver
me the prisoner that thou hast led unto thy tower, or else come and do
battle with me. Then Sir Plenorius gat his horse, and came with a spear
in his hand, galloping towards Sir Launcelot, and then they began to
feutre their spears, and came together as thunder, and smote either
other so mightily that their horses fell down under them. And then they
avoided their horses, and pulled out their swords, and like two bulls
they lashed together with great strokes and foins, but ever Sir
Launcelot recovered ground upon him, and Sir Plenorius traced to have
gone about him. But Sir Launcelot would not suffer that, but bare him
backer and backer till he came nigh his tower gate. And then said Sir
Launcelot, I know thee well for a good knight, but wit thou well thy
life and death is in my hand, and therefore yield thee to me, and thy
prisoner. The other answered no word, but strake mightily upon Sir
Launcelot's helm, that fire sprang out of his eyen; then Sir Launcelot
doubled his strokes so thick, and smote at him so mightily, that he
made him kneel upon his knees, and therewith Sir Launcelot lept upon
him and pulled him groveling down. Then Sir Plenorius yielded him, and
his tower, and all his prisoners, at his will. And then Sir Launcelot
received him and took his troth, and then he rode to the other bridge,
and there Sir Launcelot justed with other three of his brethren, the
one hight Pillounes, and the other hight Pellogris, and the third Sir
Pellandris. And first upon horseback Sir Launcelot smote them down, and
afterward he beat them on foot, and made them to yield them unto him,
and then he returned unto Sir Plenorius, and there he found in his
prison king Carados of Scotland and many other knights, and all they
were delivered. And then Sir La Cote Male Taile came to Sir Launcelot,
and then Sir Launcelot would have given him all these fortresses and
these bridges. Nay, said La Cote Male Taile, I will not have Sir
Plenorius's livelihood: with that he will grant you, my lord Sir
Launcelot, to come unto king Arthur's court, and to be his knight, and
all his brethren, I will pray you, my lord, to let him have his
livelihood. I will well, said Sir Launcelot, with this that he will
come to the court of king Arthur, and become his man, and his brethren
five. And as for you, Sir Plenorius, I will undertake, said Sir
Launcelot, at the next feast, so there be a place voided, that ye shall
be knight of the Round Table. Sir, said Sir Plenorius, at the next
feast of Pentecost I will be at Arthur's court, and at that time I will
be guided and ruled as king Arthur and ye will have me. Then Sir
Launcelot and Sir La Cote Male Tail reposed them there unto the time
that Sir La Cote Male Taile was whole of his wounds, and there they had
merry cheer, and good rest, and many games, and there were many fair
ladies.


CHAPTER IX.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot made La Cote Male Taile lord of the castle of
Pendragon, and after was made knight of the Round Table._

And in the mean while there came Sir Kay the seneschal, and Sir
Brandiles, and anon they fellowshipped with them. And then within ten
days then departed those knights of king Arthur's court from these
fortresses. And as Sir Launcelot came by the castle of Pendragon, there
he put Sir Brian de les isles from his lands, because he would never be
withold with king Arthur, and all that castle of Pendragon, and all the
lands thereof, he gave to Sir La Cote Male Taile. And then Sir
Launcelot sent for Sir Nerovens, that he made once knight, and he made
him to have all the rule of that castle and of that country under La
Cote Male Taile. And so they rode to Arthur's court all wholly
together. And at Pentecost next following there was Sir Plenorius, and
Sir La Cote Male Taile, called otherwise by right Sir Breunor le Noire,
both made knights of the Table Round, and great lands king Arthur gave
them; and there Breunor le Noire wedded that damsel Maledisant. And
after she was called Beauvivante: but ever after for the more part he
was called La Cote Male Taile, and he proved a passing noble knight and
mighty, and many worshipful deeds he did after in his life, and Sir
Plenorius proved a noble knight and full of prowess. And all the days
of their life for the most part they awaited upon Sir Launcelot. And
Sir Plenorius's brethren were ever knights of king Arthur. And also as
the French book maketh mention, Sir La Cote Male Taile avenged his
father's death.


CHAPTER X.
----------

_How La Beale Isoud sent letters unto Sir Tristram by her maid
Bragwaine, and of divers adventures of Sir Tristram._

Now leave we here Sir La Cote Male Taile, and turn we unto Sir Tristram
de Liones that was in Britanny. When La Beale Isoud understood that he
was wedded she sent unto him by her maiden Bragwaine as piteous letters
as could be thought and made, and her conclusion was, that, and it
pleased Sir Tristram, that he would come to her court and bring with
him Isoud la Blanche Mains, and they should be kept as well as she
herself. Then Sir Tristram called unto him Sir Kehydius and asked him
whether he would go with him into Cornwall secretly. He answered him
that he was ready at all times. And then he let ordain privily a little
vessel, and therein they went, Sir Tristram, Kehydius, dame Bragwaine,
and Gouvernail Sir Tristram's squire. So when they were in the sea, a
contrarious wind blew them on the coasts of North Wales, nigh the
castle perilous. Then said Sir Tristram, Here shall ye abide me these
ten days, and Gouvernail my squire with you. And if so be I come not
again by that day, take the next way into Cornwall, for in this forest
are many strange adventures as I have heard say, and some of them I
cast me to prove or I depart: and when I may I shall hie me after you.
Then Sir Tristram and Kehydius took their horses and departed from
their fellowship. And so they rode within that forest a mile and more.
And at the last Sir Tristram saw afore him a likely knight armed,
sitting by a well, and a strong mighty horse passing nigh him tied to
an oak, and a man hoving and riding by him, leading an horse laden with
spears. And this knight that sat at the well seemed by his countenance
to be passing heavy. Then Sir Tristram rode near him and said, Fair
knight, why sit ye so drooping? Ye seem to be a knight errant by your
arms and harness, and therefore dress you to just with one of us or
with both. Therewithal that knight made no words, but took his shield
and buckled it about his neck, and lightly he took his horse and lept
upon him. And then he took a great spear of his squire, and departed
his way a furlong. Sir Kehydius asked leave of Sir Tristram to just
first. Do your best, said Sir Tristram. So they met together, and there
Sir Kehydius had a fall, and was sore wounded on high above the breast.
Then Sir Tristram said, Knight, that is well justed, now make you ready
unto me. I am ready, said the knight. And then that knight took a
greater spear in his hand and encountered with Sir Tristram, and there
by great force that knight smote down Sir Tristram from his horse, and
he had a great fall. Then Sir Tristram was sore ashamed, and lightly he
avoided his horse and put his shield afore his shoulder, and drew his
sword. And then Sir Tristram required that knight of his knighthood to
alight upon foot and fight with him. I will well, said the knight. And
so he alight upon foot and avoided his horse, and cast his shield upon
his shoulder, and drew his sword, and there they fought a long battle
together full nigh two hours.

Then Sir Tristram said, Fair knight, hold thy hand, and tell me of
whence thou art, and what is thy name. As for that, said the knight, I
will be advised, but and thou wilt tell me thy name, peradventure I
will tell thee mine.


CHAPTER XI.
-----------

_How Sir Tristram met with Sir Lamorak de Galis, and how they fought,
and after accorded never to fight together._

Now fair knight, he said, my name is Sir Tristram de Liones. Sir, said
the other knight, and my name is Sir Lamorak de Galis. Ah Sir Lamorak,
said Sir Tristram, well be we met, and bethink thee now of the despite
that thou didst me of the sending of the horn unto king Mark's court,
to the intent to have slain or dishonoured my lady the queen La Beale
Isoud. And therefore wit thou well, said Sir Tristram, the one of us
shall die or we depart. Sir, said Sir Lamorak, remember that we were
together in the isle of Servage, and at that time ye promised me great
friendship. Then Sir Tristram would make no longer delays, but lashed
at Sir Lamorak, and thus they fought long, till either were weary of
other. Then Sir Tristram said to Sir Lamorak, In all my life met I
never with such a knight that was so big and well breathed as ye be;
therefore, said Sir Tristram, it were pity that any of us both should
here be mischieved. Sir, said Sir Lamorak, for your renown and name I
will that ye have the worship of this battle, and therefore I will
yield me unto you. And therewith he took the point of his sword to
yield him. Nay, said Sir Tristram, ye shall not do so, for I know well
your proffers are more of your gentleness than for any fear or dread ye
have of me. And therewithal Sir Tristram proffered him his sword, and
said, Sir Lamorak, as an overcome knight I yield me unto you, as to a
man of the most noble prowess that ever I met withal. Nay, said Sir
Lamorak, I will do you gentleness. I require you let us be sworn
together that never none of us shall after this day have ado with
other. And there withal Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak sware that never
none of them should fight against other, nor for weal nor for woe.


CHAPTER XII.
------------

_How Sir Palamides followed the questing beast, and he smote down both
Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak with one spear._

And this mean while there came Sir Palamides the good knight following
the questing beast that had in shape a head like a serpent's head, and
a body like a libbard, haunches like a lion, and footed like a hart,
and in his body there was such a noise as it had been the noise of
thirty couple of hounds questing, and such a noise that beast made
wheresoever he went. And this beast evermore Sir Palamides followed,
for it was called his quest. And right so as he followed this beast it
came by Sir Tristram, and soon after came Palamides, and to brief this
matter he smote down Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak both with one spear,
and so he departed after the beast Glatisant, that was called the
questing beast, wherefore these two knights were passing wroth that Sir
Palamides would not fight on foot with them.

Here men may understand that be of worship, that he was never formed
that all times might stand, but some time he was put to the worse by
mal-fortune. And at some time the worse knight put the better knight to
a rebuke. Then Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak gat Sir Kehydius upon a
shield betwixt them both, and led him to a forester's lodge, and there
they gave him in charge to keep him well, and with him they abode three
days. Then the two knights took their horses and at the cross they
parted. And then said Sir Tristram to Sir Lamorak, I require you if ye
hap to meet with Sir Palamides, say him that he shall find me at the
same well there I met him, and there I, Sir Tristram, shall prove
whether he be better knight than I. And so either departed from other a
sundry way, and Sir Tristram rode nigh there as was Sir Kehydius, and
Sir Lamorak rode until he came to a chapel, and there he put his horse
unto pasture. And anon there came Sir Meliagaunce that was king
Bagdemagus's son, and he there put his horse to pasture, and was not
ware of Sir Lamorak, and then this knight Sir Meliagaunce made his moan
of the love that he had to queen Guenever, and there he made a woful
complaint. All this heard Sir Lamorak, and on the morn Sir Lamorak took
his horse and rode unto the forest, and there he met two knights hoving
under the wood shawe. Fair knights, said Sir Lamorak, what do ye hoving
here and watching, and if ye be knights errant that will just, lo I am
ready. Nay, sir knight, they said, not so, we abide not here for to
just with you, but we lie here in await of a knight that slew our
brother. What knight was that, said Sir Lamorak, that ye would fain
meet withal. Sir, they said, it is Sir Launcelot that slew our brother,
and if ever we may meet with him he shall not escape but we shall slay
him. Ye take upon you a great charge, said Sir Lamorak, for Sir
Launcelot is a noble proved knight. As for that we doubt not, for there
is none of us but we are good enough for him. I will not believe that,
said Sir Lamorak, for I heard never yet of no knight the days of my
life but Sir Launcelot was too big for him.


CHAPTER XIII.
-------------

_How Sir Lamorak met with Sir Meliagaunce, and how they fought together
for the beauty of queen Guenever._

Right so as they stood talking thus, Sir Lamorak was ware how Sir
Launcelot came riding straight toward them; then Sir Lamorak saluted
him, and he him again. And then Sir Lamorak asked Sir Launcelot if
there were any thing that he might do for him in these marches. Nay,
said Sir Launcelot, not at this time, I thank you. Then either departed
from other, and Sir Lamorak rode again there as he left the two
knights, and then he found them hid in the leaved wood. Fie on you,
said Sir Lamorak, false cowards, pity and shame it is that any of you
should take the high order of knighthood. So Sir Lamorak departed from
them, and within a while he met with Sir Meliagaunce, and then Sir
Lamorak asked him why he loved queen Guenever as he did: For I was not
far from you when ye made your complaint by the chapel. Did ye so, said
Sir Meliagaunce, then will I abide by it: I love queen Guenever; what
will ye with it? I will prove and make good that she is the fairest
lady and most of beauty in the world. As to that, said Sir Lamorak, I
say nay thereto, for queen Morgause of Orkney, mother to Sir Gawaine,
and his mother is the fairest queen and lady that beareth the life.
That is not so, said Sir Meliagaunce, and that will I prove with my
hands upon thy body. Will ye so, said Sir Lamorak, and in a better
quarrel keep I not to fight. Then they departed either from other in
great wrath. And then they came riding together as it had been thunder,
and either smote other so sore that their horses fell backward to the
earth. And then they avoided their horses, and dressed their shields,
and drew their swords. And then they hurtled together as wild boars,
and thus they fought a great while. For Meliagaunce was a good man and
of great might, but Sir Lamorak was hard big for him, and put him
always aback; but either had wounded other sore. And as they stood thus
fighting, by fortune came Sir Launcelot and Sir Bleoberis riding. And
then Sir Launcelot rode betwixt them, and asked them for what cause
they fought so together, and ye are both knights of king Arthur.


CHAPTER XIV.
------------

_How Sir Meliagaunce told for what cause they fought, and how Sir
Lamorak justed with king Arthur._

Sir, said Meliagaunce, I shall tell you for what cause we do this
battle. I praised my lady queen Guenever, and said she was the fairest
lady of the world, and Sir Lamorak said nay thereto, for he said queen
Morgause of Orkney was fairer than she, and more of beauty. Ah Sir
Lamorak, why sayest thou so? It is not thy part to dispraise thy
princess that thou art under her obeisance and we all. And therewith he
alight on foot, and said, For this quarrel make thee ready, for I will
prove upon thee that queen Guenever is the fairest lady and most of
bounty in the world. Sir, said Sir Lamorak, I am loth to have ado with
you in this quarrel. For every man thinketh his own lady fairest; and
though I praise the lady that I love most, ye should not be wroth. For
though my lady queen Guenever be fairest in your eye, wit ye well queen
Morgause of Orkney is fairest in mine eye, and so every knight thinketh
his own lady fairest; and, wit ye well, Sir, ye are the man in the
world, except Sir Tristram, that I am most lothest to have ado withal.
But and ye will needs fight with me, I shall endure you as long as I
may. Then spake Sir Bleoberis, and said, My lord Sir Launcelot, I wist
you never so misadvised as ye are now. For Sir Lamorak saith you but
reason and knightly. For I warn you I have a lady, and me thinketh that
she is the fairest lady of the world. Were this a great reason that ye
should be wroth with me for such language? And well ye wot that Sir
Lamorak is as noble a knight as I know, and he hath owed you and us
ever good will, and therefore I pray you be good friends. Then Sir
Launcelot said unto Sir Lamorak: I pray you forgive me mine evil will;
and if I was misadvised I will amend it. Sir, said Sir Lamorak, the
amends is soon made betwixt you and me. And so Sir Launcelot and Sir
Bleoberis departed. And Sir Meliagaunce and Sir Lamorak took their
horses, and either departed from other. And within a while came king
Arthur, and met with Sir Lamorak, and justed with him, and there he
smote down Sir Lamorak, and wounded him sore with a spear, and so he
rode from him, wherefore Sir Lamorak was wroth that he would not fight
with him on foot; how be it that Sir Lamorak knew not king Arthur.


CHAPTER XV.
-----------

_How Sir Kay met with Sir Tristram, and after of the shame spoken of
the knights of Cornwall, and how they justed._

Now leave we of this tale, and speak we of Sir Tristram, that as he
rode he met with Sir Kay the seneschal, and there Sir Kay asked Sir
Tristram of what country he was. He answered that he was of the country
of Cornwall. It may well be, said Sir Kay, for yet heard I never that
ever good knight came out of Cornwall. That is evil spoken, said Sir
Tristram, but and it please you to tell me your name I require you.
Sir, wit ye well, said Sir Kay, that my name is Sir Kay the seneschal.
Is that your name? said Sir Tristram; now wit ye well that ye are named
the shamefullest knight of your tongue that now is living, how be it ye
are called a good knight, but ye are called unfortunate, and passing
overthwart of your tongue. And thus they rode together till they came
to a bridge. And there was a knight would not let them pass till one of
them justed with him. And so that knight justed with Sir Kay, and there
that knight gave Sir Kay a fall; his name was Sir Tor, Sir Lamorak's
half brother. And then they two rode to their lodging, and there they
found Sir Brandiles; and Sir Tor came thither anon after.

And as they sat at supper, these four knights, three of them spake all
shame by Cornish knights. Sir Tristram heard all that they said, and he
said but little, but he thought the more; but at that time he
discovered not his name. Upon the morn Sir Tristram took his horse and
abode them upon their way; and there Sir Brandiles proffered to just
with Sir Tristram, and Sir Tristram smote him down, horse and all, to
the earth. Then Sir Tor le Fise de Vayshoure encountered with Sir
Tristram, and there Sir Tristram smote him down. And then he rode his
way, and Sir Kay followed him, but he would not of his fellowship. Then
Sir Brandiles came to Sir Kay, and said, I would wit fain what is that
knight's name. Come on with me, said Sir Kay, and we shall pray him to
tell us his name. So they rode together till they came nigh him; and
then they were ware where he sat by a well, and had put off his helm to
drink at the well. And when he saw them come, he laced on his helm
lightly, and took his horse, and proffered them to just. Nay, said Sir
Brandiles, we justed late enough with you; we come not in that intent.
But for this we come, to require you of knighthood to tell us your
name. My fair knights, since that is your desire, and to please you, ye
shall wit that my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, nephew unto king Mark
of Cornwall. In good time, said Sir Brandiles, and well ye be found;
and wit ye well that we be right glad that we have found you, and we be
of a fellowship that would be right glad of your company. For ye are
the knight in the world that the noble fellowship of the Round Table
most desireth to have the company of. I thank them, said Sir Tristram,
of their great goodness; but as yet I feel well that I am unable to be
of their fellowship. For I was never of such deeds of worthiness to be
in the company of such a fellowship. Ah, said Sir Kay, and ye be Sir
Tristram de Liones, ye are the man now called most of prowess, except
Sir Launcelot du Lake. For he beareth not the life, christian ne
heathen, that can find such another knight, to speak of his prowess,
and of his hands, and his truth withal. For yet could there never
creature say of him dishonour and make it good. Thus they talked a
great while; and then they departed either from other, such ways as
them seemed best.


CHAPTER XVI.
------------

_How king Arthur was brought into the forest perilous, and how Sir
Tristram saved his life._

Now shall ye hear what was the cause that king Arthur came into the
forest perilous, that was in North Wales, by the means of a lady. Her
name was Annowre, and this lady came to king Arthur at Cardiff, and
she, by fair promise and fair behests, made king Arthur to ride with
her into that forest perilous; and she was a great sorceress, and many
days she had loved king Arthur, and therefore she came into that
country. So when the king was gone with her, many of his knights
followed after king Arthur when they missed him, as Sir Launcelot,
Brandiles, and many other. And when she had brought him to her tower,
she desired him to love her. And then the king remembered him of his
lady, and would not love her for no craft that she could do. Then every
day she would make him ride into that forest with his own knights, to
the intent to have had king Arthur slain. For when this lady Annowre
saw that she might not have him at her will, then she laboured by false
means to have destroyed king Arthur and slain. Then the Lady of the
lake, that was alway friendly to king Arthur, she understood by her
subtle crafts that king Arthur was like to be destroyed. And therefore
this Lady of the lake, that hight Nimue, came into that forest to seek
after Sir Launcelot du Lake, or Sir Tristram, for to help king Arthur;
for as that same day this Lady of the lake knew well that king Arthur
should be slain, unless that he had help of one of these two knights.
And thus she rode up and down till she met with Sir Tristram, and anon
as she saw him she knew him. O my lord Sir Tristram, she said, well be
ye met, and blessed be the time that I have met with you; for this same
day, and within these two hours, shall be done the foulest deed that
ever was done in this land. O fair damsel, said Sir Tristram, may I
amend it? Come on with me, she said, and that in all the haste ye may,
for ye shall see the most worshipfullest knight of the world hard
bested. Then said Sir Tristram, I am ready to help such a noble man. He
is neither better nor worse, said the Lady of the lake, but the noble
king Arthur himself. God defend, said Sir Tristram, that ever he should
be in such distress. Then they rode together a great pace, until they
came to a little turret or castle, and underneath that castle they saw
a knight standing upon foot fighting with two knights; and so Sir
Tristram beheld them, and at the last the two knights smote down the
one knight, and that one of them unlaced his helm to have slain him.
And the lady Annowre gat king Arthur's sword in her hand to have
stricken off his head. And therewithal came Sir Tristram with all his
might, crying, Traitress, traitress, leave that. And anon there Sir
Tristram smote one of the knights through the body, that he fell dead;
and then he rashed to the other and smote his back in sunder, and in
the mean while the Lady of the lake cried to king Arthur, Let not that
false lady escape. Then king Arthur overtook her, and with the same
sword he smote off her head; and the Lady of the lake took up her head,
and hung it up by the hair on her saddle bow. And then Sir Tristram
horsed king Arthur, and rode forth with him, but he charged the Lady of
the lake not to discover his name as at that time. When the king was
horsed he thanked heartily Sir Tristram, and desired to wit his name;
but he would not tell him, but that he was a poor knight adventurous.
And so he bare king Arthur fellowship till he met with some of his
knights. And within a mile he met with Sir Ector de Maris, and he knew
not king Arthur nor Sir Tristram, and he desired to just with one of
them. Then Sir Tristram rode unto Sir Ector, and smote him from his
horse. And when he had done so he came again to the king, and said: My
lord, yonder is one of your knights, he may bear you fellowship; and
another day by that deed that I have done for you, I trust ye shall
understand that I would do you service. Alas, said king Arthur, let me
wit what ye are. Not at this time, said Sir Tristram. So he departed,
and left king Arthur and Sir Ector together.


CHAPTER XVII.
-------------

_How Sir Tristram came to La Beale Isoud, and how Kehydius began to
love La Beale Isoud, and of a letter that Tristram found._

And then at a day set Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak met at the well; and
then they took Kehydius at the forester's house, and so they rode with
him to the ship where they left dame Bragwaine and Gouvernail, and so
they sailed into Cornwall all wholly together; and by assent and
information of dame Bragwaine, when they were landed they rode unto Sir
Dinas the seneschal, a trusty friend of Sir Tristram's. And so dame
Bragwaine and Sir Dinas rode to the court of king Mark, and told the
queen, La Beale Isoud, that Sir Tristram was nigh her in that country.
Then for very pure joy La Beale Isoud swooned: and when she might
speak, she said, Gentle knight seneschal, help that I might speak with
him, or else my heart will brast.

Then Sir Dinas and dame Bragwaine brought Sir Tristram and Kehydius
privily unto the court, unto a chamber whereas La Beale Isoud assigned
it; and to tell the joy that was between La Beale Isoud and Sir
Tristram, there is no tongue can tell it, nor heart think it, nor pen
write it. And, as the French book maketh mention, at the first time
that ever Sir Kehydius saw La Beale Isoud, he was so enamoured upon her
that for very pure love he might never withdraw it. And at the last, as
ye shall hear or the book be ended, Sir Kehydius died for the love of
La Beale Isoud. And then privily he wrote unto her letters and ballads
of the most goodliest that were used in those days. And when La Beale
Isoud understood his letters, she had pity of his complaint, and
unadvised she wrote another letter to comfort him withal. And Sir
Tristram was all this while in a turret, at the commandment of La Beale
Isoud, and when she might she came unto Sir Tristram. So on a day king
Mark played at the chess under a chamber window; and at that time Sir
Tristram and Sir Kehydius were within the chamber, over king Mark, and
as it mishapped Sir Tristram found the letter that Kehydius sent to La
Beale Isoud; also he had found the letter that she wrote unto Kehydius,
and at that same time La Beale Isoud was in the same chamber. Then Sir
Tristram came unto La Beale Isoud, and said; Madam, here is a letter
that was sent unto you, and here is the letter that ye sent unto him
that sent you that letter. Alas, madam, the good love that I have loved
you, and many lands and riches have I forsaken for your love, and now
ye are a traitress to me, the which doth me great pain. But as for
thee, Sir Kehydius, I brought thee out of Britanny into this country,
and thy father, king Howel, I won his lands; howbeit, I wedded thy
sister, Isoud la Blanche Mains, for the goodness which she did to me;
but wit thou well Sir Kehydius for this falsehood and treason thou hast
done me, I will revenge it upon thee. And therewithal Sir Tristram drew
out his sword, and said, Sir Kehydius keep thee, and then La Beale
Isoud swooned to the earth. And when Sir Kehydius saw Sir Tristram come
upon him, he saw none other boot, but lept out at a bay window, even
over the head where sat king Mark playing at the chess. And when the
king saw one come hurling over his head, he said, Fellow, what art
thou, and what is the cause thou leapest out of that window? My lord
the king, said Kehydius, it fortuned me that I was asleep in the window
above your head, and as I slept I slumbered, and so I fell down. And
thus Sir Kehydius excused him.


CHAPTER XVIII.
--------------

_How Sir Tristram departed from Tintagil, and how he sorrowed, and was
so long in a forest till he was out of his mind._

Then Sir Tristram dread sore lest he were discovered unto the king that
he was there, wherefore he drew him to the strength of the tower, and
armed him in such armour as he had, for to fight with them that would
withstand him. And so when Sir Tristram saw there was no resistance
against him, he sent Gouvernail for his horse and for his spear, and
knightly he rode forth out of the castle openly that was called the
castle of Tintagil. And even at the gate he met with Gingalin, Sir
Gawaine's son. And anon Sir Gingalin put his spear in his rest, and ran
upon Sir Tristram, and brake his spear, and Sir Tristram at that time
had but a sword, and gave him such a buffet upon the helm that he fell
down from his saddle, and his sword slid down and carved asunder his
horse neck. And so Sir Tristram rode his way into the forest, and all
this doing saw king Mark. And then he sent a squire unto the hurt
knight, and commanded him to come to him, and so he did. And when king
Mark wist that it was Sir Gingalin, he welcomed him, and gave him a
horse, and asked him what knight it was that had encountered with him.
Sir, said Sir Gingalin, I wot not what knight he was, but well I wot
that he sigheth, and maketh great dole. Then Sir Tristram within a
while met with a knight of his own, that hight Sir Fergus. And when he
had met with him he made great sorrow, insomuch that he fell down off
his horse in a swoon, and in such sorrow he was in three days and three
nights. Then at the last Sir Tristram sent unto the court by Sir
Fergus, for to ask what tidings. And so as he rode by the way he met
with a damsel that came from Sir Palamides, to know and seek how Sir
Tristram did. Then Sir Fergus told her how he was almost out of his
mind. Alas, said the damsel, where shall I find him? In such a place,
said Sir Fergus. Then Sir Fergus found queen Isoud sick in her bed,
making the greatest dole that ever any earthly woman made. And when the
damsel found Sir Tristram, she made great dole because she might not
amend him; for the more she made of him the more was his pain. And at
the last Sir Tristram took his horse and rode away from her. And then
was it three days or that she could find him, and then she brought him
meat and drink, but he would none. And then another time Sir Tristram
escaped away from the damsel, and it happed him to ride by the same
castle where Sir Palamides and Sir Tristram did battle when La Beale
Isoud departed them. And there by fortune the damsel met with Sir
Tristram again, making the greatest dole that ever earthly creature
made, and she went to the lady of that castle, and told her of the
misadventure of Sir Tristram. Alas, said the lady of that castle, where
is my lord Sir Tristram? Right here by your castle, said the damsel. In
good time, said the lady, is he so nigh me: he shall have meat and
drink of the best, and a harp I have of his whereupon he taught
me,--for of goodly harping he beareth the prize in the world. So this
lady and the damsel brought him meat and drink, but he eat little
thereof. Then upon a night he put his horse from him, and then he
unlaced his armour, and then Sir Tristram would go into the wilderness,
and brast down the trees and boughs; and otherwhile, when he found the
harp that the lady sent him, then would he harp and play thereupon and
weep together. And sometime when Sir Tristram was in the wood, that the
lady wist not where he was, then would she sit her down and play upon
that harp: then would Sir Tristram come to that harp and hearken
thereto, and sometime he would harp himself. Thus he there endured a
quarter of a year. Then at the last he ran his way, and she wist not
where he was become. And then was he naked, and waxed lean and poor of
flesh, and so he fell into the fellowship of herdmen and shepherds, and
daily they would give him of their meat and drink. And when he did any
shrewd deed they would beat him with rods, and so they clipped him with
shears and made him like a fool.


CHAPTER XIX.
------------

_How Sir Tristram soused Dagonet in a well, and how Palamides sent a
damsel to seek Tristram, and how Palamides met with king Mark._

And upon a day Sir Dagonet, king Arthur's fool, came into Cornwall,
with two squires with him, and as they rode through that forest they
came by a fair well where Sir Tristram was wont to be, and the weather
was hot, and they alight to drink of that well, and in the mean while
their horses brake loose. Right so Sir Tristram came unto them, and
first he soused Sir Dagonet in that well, and after his squires, and
thereat laughed the shepherds, and forthwithal he ran after their
horses, and brought them again one by one, and right so, wet as they
were, he made them leap up and ride their ways. Thus Sir Tristram
endured there an half year naked, and would never come in town nor
village. The mean while the damsel that Sir Palamides sent to seek Sir
Tristram she went unto Sir Palamides, and told him all the mischief
that Sir Tristram endured. Alas, said Sir Palamides, it is great pity
that ever so noble a knight should be so mischieved for the love of a
lady. But nevertheless I will go and seek him, and comfort him and I
may. Then a little before that time La Beale Isoud had commanded Sir
Kehydius out of the country of Cornwall. So Sir Kehydius departed with
a dolorous heart. And by adventure he met with Sir Palamides, and they
enfellowshipped together, and either complained to other of their love,
that they loved La Beale Isoud. Now let us, said Sir Palamides, seek
Sir Tristram that loved her as well as we, and let us prove whether we
may recover him. So they rode into that forest, and three days and
three nights they would never take their lodging, but ever sought Sir
Tristram. And upon a time by adventure they met with king Mark that was
ridden from his men all alone. When they saw him, Sir Palamides knew
him, but Sir Kehydius knew him not. Ah, false king, said Sir Palamides,
it is pity thou hast thy life, for thou art a destroyer of all
worshipful knights, and by thy mischief, and thy vengeance, thou hast
destroyed that most noble knight Sir Tristram de Liones; and therefore
defend thee, said Sir Palamides, for thou shalt die this day. That were
shame, said king Mark, for ye two are armed, and I am unarmed. As for
that, said Sir Palamides, I shall find a remedy therefore. Here is a
knight with me, and thou shalt have his harness. Nay, said king Mark, I
will not have ado with you, for cause have ye none to me. For all the
misease that Sir Tristram hath was for a letter that he found; for, as
to me, I did to him no displeasure, and I am full sorry for his disease
and malady. So when the king had thus excused him, they were friends,
and king Mark would have had them unto Tintagil, but Sir Palamides
would not, but turned unto the realm of Logris, and Sir Kehydius said
he would go into Britanny.

Now turn we unto Sir Dagonet again, then when he and his squires were
upon horseback, he deemed that the shepherds had sent that fool to
array them so because that they laughed at them, and so they rode unto
the keepers of beasts, and all to beat them. Sir Tristram saw them
beaten that were wont to give him meat and drink, then he ran thither
and gat Sir Dagonet by the head, and gave him such a fall to the earth
that he bruised him sore, so that he lay still. And then he wrast his
sword out of his hand and therewith he ran to one of his squires and
smote off his head, and the other fled. And so Sir Tristram took his
way with that sword in his hand, running as he had been wild wood. Then
Sir Dagonet rode to king Mark and told him how he had sped in that
forest. And therefore, said Sir Dagonet, beware, king Mark, that thou
come not about that well in the forest, for there is a fool naked, and
that fool and I fool met together, and he had almost slain me. Ah, said
king Mark, that is Sir Matto le Breune, that fell out of his wit
because he lost his lady. For when Sir Gaheris smote down Sir Matto and
won his lady of him, never since was he in his mind, and that was pity,
for he was a good knight.


CHAPTER XX.
-----------

_How it was noised how Sir Tristram was dead, and how La Beale Isoud
would have slain herself._

Then Sir Andred that was cousin unto Sir Tristram, made a lady that was
his paramour to say and noise it that she was with Sir Tristram or ever
he died. And this tale she brought unto king Mark's court, that she
buried him by a well, and that or he died he besought king Mark to make
his cousin, Sir Andred, king of the country of Liones, of the which Sir
Tristram was lord of. All this did Sir Andred because he would have had
Sir Tristram's lands. And when king Mark heard tell that Sir Tristram
was dead, he wept and made great dole. But when queen Isoud heard of
these tidings, she made such sorrow that she was nigh out of her mind.
And so upon a day she thought to slay herself, and never to live after
Sir Tristram's death. And so upon a day La Beale Isoud gat a sword
privily, and bare it into her garden, and there she pight the sword
through a plum tree up to the hilts, so that it stack fast, and it
stood breast high. And as she would have run upon the sword and to have
slain herself, all this espied king Mark, how she kneeled down and
said, Sweet Lord Jesu have mercy upon me, for I may not live after the
death of Sir Tristram de Liones, for he was my first love, and he shall
be the last. And with these words came king Mark and took her in his
arms, and then he took up the sword, and bare her away with him into a
strong tower, and there he made her to be kept, and watched her surely.
And after that she lay long sick, nigh at the point of death. This mean
while ran Sir Tristram naked in the forest with the sword in his hand,
and so he came to an hermitage, and there he laid him down and slept,
and in the mean while the hermit stale away his sword, and laid meat
down by him. Thus was he kept there a ten days, and at the last he
departed and came to the herdmen again. And there was a giant in that
country that hight Tauleas, and for fear of Sir Tristram more than
seven years he durst never much go at large, but for the most part he
kept him in a sure castle of his own. And so this Tauleas heard tell
that Sir Tristram was dead, by the noise of the court of king Mark.
Then this Tauleas went daily at large. And so it happed upon a day he
came to the herdmen wandering and lingering, and there he set him down
to rest among them. The mean while there came a knight of Cornwall that
led a lady with him, and his name was Sir Dinant. And when the giant
saw him, he went from the herdmen and hid him under a tree, and so the
knight came to the well, and there he alight to repose him. And as soon
as he was from his horse, the giant Tauleas came betwixt this knight
and his horse, and took the horse and lept upon him. So forthwith he
rode unto Sir Dinant and took him by the collar, and pulled him afore
him upon his horse, and there would have stricken off his head. Then
the herdmen said unto Sir Tristram, Help yonder knight. Help ye him,
said Sir Tristram. We dare not, said the herdmen. Then Sir Tristram was
ware of the sword of the knight there as it lay, and so thither he ran,
and took up the sword and strake off Sir Tauleas's head, and so he went
his way to the herdmen again.


CHAPTER XXI.
------------

_How king Mark found Sir Tristram naked, and made him to be borne home
to Tintagil, and how he was there known by a brachet._

Then the knight took up the giant's head, and bare it with him unto
king Mark, and told him what adventure betid him in the forest, and how
a naked man rescued him from the grimly giant Tauleas. Where had ye
this adventure? said king Mark. Forsooth, said Sir Dinant, at the fair
fountain in your forest where many adventurous knights meet, and there
is the mad man. Well, said king Mark, I will see that wild man. So
within a day or two king Mark commanded his knights and his hunters,
that they should be ready on the morn for to hunt, and on the morn he
went unto that forest. And when the king came to that well, he found
there lying by that well a fair naked man, and a sword by him. Then
king Mark blew and straked, and therewith his knights came to him. And
then the king commanded his knights to take that naked man with
fairness, and bring him to my castle. So they did softly and fair, and
cast mantles upon Sir Tristram, and so led him unto Tintagil; and there
they bathed him and washed him, and gave him hot suppings, till they
had brought him well to his remembrance. But all this while there was
no creature that knew Sir Tristram, nor what man he was. So it fell
upon a day that the queen La Beale Isoud heard of such a man that ran
naked in the forest, and how the king had brought him home to the
court. Then La Beale Isoud called unto her dame Bragwaine, and said,
Come on with me, for we will go see this man that my lord brought from
the forest the last day. So they passed forth, and asked where was the
sick man. And then a squire told the queen that he was in the garden
taking his rest, and reposing him against the sun. So when the queen
looked upon Sir Tristram she was not remembered of him. But ever she
said unto dame Bragwaine, Me seemeth I should have seen him heretofore
in many places. But as soon as Sir Tristram saw her he knew her well
enough, and then he turned away his visage and wept. Then the queen had
always a little brachet with her, that Sir Tristram gave her the first
time that ever she came into Cornwall, and never would that brachet
depart from her, but if Sir Tristram was nigh there as was La Beale
Isoud; and this brachet was sent from the king's daughter of France
unto Sir Tristram for great love. And anon as this little brachet felt
a savour of Sir Tristram, she leaped upon him, and licked his cheeks
and his ears, and then she whined and quested, and she smelled at his
feet and at his hands, and on all parts of his body that she might come
to. Ah, my lady, said dame Bragwaine unto La Beale Isoud, alas, alas!
said she, I see it is mine own lord, Sir Tristram. And thereupon Isoud
fell down in a swoon, and so lay a great while; and when she might
speak, she said, My lord Sir Tristram, blessed be God ye have your
life; and now I am sure ye shall be discovered by this little brachet,
for she will never leave you; and also I am sure as soon as my lord
king Mark do know you, he will banish you out of the country of
Cornwall, or else he will destroy you. Therefore mine own lord, grant
king Mark his will, and then draw you unto the court of king Arthur,
for there are ye beloved. And ever when I may I shall send unto you,
and when ye list ye may come to me, and at all times early and late I
will be at your commandment to live as poor a life as ever did queen or
lady. O madam, said Sir Tristram, go from me, for mickle anger and
danger have I escaped for your love.


CHAPTER XXII.
-------------

_How king Mark, by the advice of his council, banished Sir Tristram out
of Cornwall the term of ten years._

Then the queen departed, but the brachet would not from him. And
therewithal came king Mark, and the brachet sat upon him, and bayed at
them all. Therewithal Sir Andred spake and said, Sir, this is Sir
Tristram, I see by the brachet. Nay, said the king, I cannot suppose
that. So the king asked him upon his faith what he was, and what was
his name. Truly, said he, my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, now do by
me what ye list. Ah, said king Mark, me repenteth of your recovery. And
then he let call his barons to judge Sir Tristram to death. Then many
of his barons would not assent thereto, and in especial Sir Dinas the
seneschal and Sir Fergus. And so by the advice of them all Sir Tristram
was banished out of the country for ten year, and thereupon he took his
oath upon a book before the king and his barons. And so he was made to
depart out of the country of Cornwall, and there were many barons
brought him into his ship, of the which some were his friends, and some
his foes. And in the mean while there came a knight of king Arthur's,
his name was Dinadan, and his coming was to seek after Sir Tristram.
Then they shewed him where he was armed at all points, going to the
ship. Now, fair knight, said Sir Dinadan, or ye pass this court, that
ye will just with me I require you. With a good will, said Sir
Tristram, and these lords will give me leave. Then the barons granted
thereto, and so they ran together, and there Sir Tristram gave Sir
Dinadan a fall. And then he prayed Sir Tristram to give him leave to go
in his fellowship. Ye shall be right welcome, said then Sir Tristram.
And so they took their horses and rode to their ships together. And
when Sir Tristram was in the sea, he said, Greet well king Mark and all
mine enemies, and say them I will come again when I may. And well am I
rewarded for the fighting with Sir Marhaus, and delivering all this
country from servage, and well I am rewarded for the fetching and costs
of La Beale Isoud out of Ireland, and the danger that I was in first
and last, and by the way coming home what danger I had to bring again
queen Isoud from the castle Pluere. And well am I rewarded when I
fought with Sir Bleoberis for Sir Segwarides' wife. And well am I
rewarded when I fought with Sir Blamor de Ganis for king Anguish,
father unto La Beale Isoud. And well am I rewarded when I smote down
the good knight Sir Lamorak de Galis at king Mark's request. And well
am I rewarded when I fought with the king with the hundred knights, and
the king of Northgalis, and both these would have put his land in
servage, and by me they were put to a rebuke. And well am I rewarded
for the slaying of Tauleas the mighty giant, and many more deeds have I
done for him, and now have I my warison. And tell king Mark that many
noble knights of the Table Round have spared the barons of this country
for my sake. Also am I not well rewarded when I fought with the good
knight Sir Palamides, and rescued queen Isoud from him. And at that
time king Mark said afore all his barons, I should have been better
rewarded. And forthwithal he took the sea.


CHAPTER XXIII.
--------------

_How a damsel sought help to help Sir Launcelot against thirty knights,
and how Sir Tristram fought with them._

And at the next landing, fast by the sea, there met with Sir Tristram
and with Sir Dinadan Sir Ector de Maris and Sir Bors de Ganis. And
there Sir Ector justed with Sir Dinadan and he smote him and his horse
down. And then Sir Tristram would have justed with Sir Bors, and Sir
Bors said he would not just with no Cornish knights, for they are not
called men of worship. And all this was done upon a bridge. And with
this came Sir Bleoberis and Sir Driant, and Sir Bleoberis proffered to
just with Sir Tristram, and there Sir Tristram smote down Sir
Bleoberis. Then said Sir Bors de Ganis, I wist never Cornish knight of
so great valour nor so valiant as that knight that beareth the
trappours embroidered with crowns. And then Sir Tristram and Sir
Dinadan departed from them into a forest, and there met them a damsel
that came for the love of Sir Launcelot to seek after some noble
knights of king Arthur's court for to rescue Sir Launcelot. And so Sir
Launcelot was ordained, for by the treason of queen Morgan le Fay to
have slain Sir Launcelot, and for that cause she ordained thirty
knights for to lie in a wait for Sir Launcelot, and this damsel knew
this treason. And for this cause the damsel came for to seek noble
knights to help Sir Launcelot. For that night, or the day after, Sir
Launcelot should come where these thirty knights were. And so this
damsel met with Sir Bors, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Ector, and Sir Driant, and
there she told them all four of the treason of Morgan le Fay. And then
they promised her that they would be nigh where Sir Launcelot should
meet with the thirty knights, and if so be they set upon him we will do
rescues as we can. So the damsel departed, and by adventure the damsel
met with Sir Tristram and with Sir Dinadan, and there the damsel told
them all the treason that was ordained for Sir Launcelot. Fair damsel,
said Sir Tristram, bring me to that same place where they should meet
with Sir Launcelot. Then said Sir Dinadan, What will ye do? it is not
for us to fight with thirty knights, and wit you well I will not
thereof, as to match one knight two or three is enough, and they be
men. But for to match fifteen knights, that will I never undertake. Fie
for shame, said Sir Tristram, do but your part. Nay, said Sir Dinadan,
I will not thereof, but if ye will lend me your shield, for ye bear a
shield of Cornwall, and for the cowardice that is named to the knights
of Cornwall, by your shields ye be ever forborn. Nay, said Sir
Tristram, I will not depart from my shield for her sake that gave it
me. But one thing, said Sir Tristram, I promise thee Sir Dinadan, but
if thou wilt promise me to abide with me, here I shall slay thee: for I
desire no more of thee but to answer one knight, and if thy heart will
not serve thee, stand by and look upon me and them. Sir, said Sir
Dinadan, I promise you to look upon and to do what I may to save
myself, but I would I had not met with you. So then anon these thirty
knights came fast by these four knights, and they were ware of them,
and either of other. And so these thirty knights let them pass for this
cause, that they would not wrath them if cause be that they had ado
with Sir Launcelot, and the four knights let them pass to this intent,
that they would see and behold what they would do with Sir Launcelot.
And so the thirty knights past on, and came by Sir Tristram and Sir
Dinadan. And then Sir Tristram cried on high, Lo here is a knight
against you for the love of Sir Launcelot. And there he slew two with
one spear, and ten with his sword. And then came in Sir Dinadan, and he
did passing well. And so of the thirty knights there went but ten away,
and they fled. All this battle saw Sir Bors de Ganis, and his three
fellows. And then they saw well it was the same knight that justed with
them at the bridge. Then they took their horses and rode unto Sir
Tristram, and praised him, and thanked him of his good deeds, and they
all desired Sir Tristram to go with them to their lodging. And he said
nay, he would not go to no lodging. Then they all four knights prayed
him to tell them his name. Fair lords, said Sir Tristram, as at this
time I will not tell you my name.


CHAPTER XXIV.
-------------

_How Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan came to a lodging where they must
just with two knights._

Then Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan rode forth their way till they came
to the shepherds and to the herdmen, and there they asked them if they
knew any lodging or harbour there nigh hand. Forsooth sirs, said the
herdmen, hereby is good lodging in a castle, but there is such a custom
that there shall no knight be harboured but if he just with two
knights, and if he be but one knight he must just with two. And as ye
be therein, soon shall ye be matched. There is shrewd harbour, said Sir
Dinadan, lodge where ye will, for I will not lodge there. Fie for
shame, said Sir Tristram, are ye not a knight of the Table Round,
wherefore ye may not with your worship refuse your lodging. Not so,
said the herdmen, for and ye be beaten and have the worse ye shall not
be lodged there, and if ye beat them ye shall be well harboured. Ah,
said Sir Dinadan, they are two sure knights. Then Sir Dinadan would not
lodge there in no manner, but as Sir Tristram required him of his
knighthood, and so they rode thither. And to make short tale, Sir
Tristram and Sir Dinadan smote them down both, and so they entered into
the castle, and had good cheer as they could think or devise. And when
they were unarmed, and thought to be merry and in good rest, there came
in at the gates Sir Palamides and Sir Gaheris, requiring to have the
custom of the castle. What array is this? said Sir Dinadan, I would
have my rest. That may not be, said Sir Tristram; now must we needs
defend the custom of this castle, insomuch as we have the better of the
lords of this castle, and therefore, said Sir Tristram, needs must ye
make you ready. In the devil's name, said Sir Dinadan, came I into your
company. And so they made them ready. And Sir Gaheris encountered with
Sir Tristram, and Sir Gaheris had a fall, and Sir Palamides encountered
with Sir Dinadan, and Sir Dinadan had a fall; then was it fall for
fall. So then must they fight on foot. That would not Sir Dinadan, for
he was so sore bruised of the fall that Sir Palamides gave him. Then
Sir Tristram unlaced Sir Dinadan's helm, and prayed him to help him. I
will not, said Sir Dinadan, for I am sore wounded of the thirty knights
that we had but late ago to do withal. But ye fare, said Sir Dinadan
unto Sir Tristram, as a mad man, and as a man that is out of his mind,
that would cast himself away, and I may curse the time that ever I saw
you. For in all the world are not two such knights that be so wood as
is Sir Launcelot and ye Sir Tristram: for once I fell in the fellowship
of Sir Launcelot as I have now done with you, and he set me a work that
a quarter of a year I kept my bed. Defend me, said Sir Dinadan, from
such two knights, and specially from your fellowship. Then, said Sir
Tristram, I will fight with them both. Then Sir Tristram bad them come
forth both, for I will fight with you. Then Sir Palamides and Sir
Gaheris dressed them and smote at them both. Then Dinadan smote at Sir
Gaheris a stroke or two, and turned from him. Nay, said Sir Palamides,
it is too much shame for us two knights to fight with one. And then he
did bid Sir Gaheris stand aside with that knight that hath no list to
fight. Then they rode together and fought long, and at the last Sir
Tristram doubled his strokes and drove Sir Palamides aback more than
three strides. And then by one assent Sir Gaheris and Sir Dinadan went
betwixt them and departed them in sunder. And then by assent of Sir
Tristram, they would have lodged together. But Sir Dinadan would not
lodge in that castle, and then he cursed the time that ever he came in
their fellowship. And so he took his horse and his harness and
departed. Then Sir Tristram prayed the lords of that castle to lend him
a man to bring him to a lodging. And so they did, and overtook Sir
Dinadan, and rode to their lodging two miles thence with a good man in
a priory, and there they were well at ease. And that same night, Sir
Bors, and Sir Bleoberis, and Sir Ector, and Sir Driant, abode still in
the same place there as Sir Tristram fought with the thirty knights,
and there they met with Sir Launcelot the same night, and had made
promise to lodge with Sir Colgrevance the same night.


CHAPTER XXV.
------------

_How Sir Tristram justed with Sir Kay and Sir Sagramor le Desirous, and
how Sir Gawaine turned Sir Tristram from Morgan le Fay._

But anon as the noble knight Sir Launcelot heard of the shield of
Cornwall, then wist he well that it was Sir Tristram that fought with
his enemies. And then Sir Launcelot praised Sir Tristram, and called
him the man of most worship in the world. So there was a knight in that
priory that hight Pellinore, and he desired to wit the name of Sir
Tristram, but in no wise he could not. And so Sir Tristram departed and
left Sir Dinadan in the priory, for he was so weary and so sore bruised
that he might not ride. Then this knight, Sir Pellinore, said to Sir
Dinadan, Sithen that ye will not tell me that knight's name, I will
ride after him and make him to tell me his name, or he shall die
therefore. Beware, sir knight, said Sir Dinadan, for and ye follow him
ye shall repent it. So that knight, Sir Pellinore, rode after Sir
Tristram, and required him of justs. Then Sir Tristram smote him down,
and wounded him through the shoulder, and so he past on his way. And on
the next day following Sir Tristram met with pursuivants, and they told
him that there was made a great cry of tournament between king Carados
of Scotland and the king of North Wales, and either should just against
other at the Castle of Maidens. And these pursuivants sought all the
country after the good knights, and in especial king Carados let make
seeking for Sir Launcelot, and the king of Northgalis let seek after
Sir Tristram de Liones. And at that time Sir Tristram thought to be at
that justs, and so by adventure they met with Sir Kay the seneschal and
Sir Sagramor le Desirous, and Sir Kay required Sir Tristram to just,
and Sir Tristram in a manner refused him, because he would not be hurt
nor bruised against the great justs that should be before the Castle of
Maidens, and therefore he thought to repose him, and to rest him. And
alway Sir Kay cried, Sir knight of Cornwall, just with me, or else
yield thee to me as recreant. When Sir Tristram heard him say so, he
turned to him, and then Sir Kay refused him, and turned his back. Then
Sir Tristram said, As I find thee shall I take thee. Then Sir Kay
turned with evil will, and Sir Tristram smote Sir Kay down, and so he
rode forth. Then Sir Sagramor le Desirous rode after Sir Tristram and
made him to just with him. And there Sir Tristram smote down Sir
Sagramor le Desirous from his horse, and rode his way, and the same day
he met with a damsel that told him that he should win great worship of
a knight adventurous, that did much harm in all that country.

When Sir Tristram heard her say so, he was glad to go with her to win
worship. So Sir Tristram rode with that damsel a six mile, and then met
him Sir Gawaine, and therewithal Sir Gawaine knew the damsel, that she
was a damsel of queen Morgan le Fay. Then Sir Gawaine understood that
she led that knight to some mischief. Fair knight, said Sir Gawaine,
whither ride you now with that damsel? Sir, said Sir Tristram, I wot
not whither I shall ride, but as the damsel will lead me. Sir, said Sir
Gawaine, ye shall not ride with her, for she and her lady did never
good, but ill. And then Sir Gawaine pulled out his sword, and said,
Damsel, but if thou tell me anon for what cause thou leadest this
knight with thee, thou shalt die for it right anon. I know all your
lady's treason and yours. Mercy, Sir Gawaine, she said, and if ye will
save my life I will tell you. Say on, said Sir Gawaine, and thou shalt
have thy life. Sir, she said, queen Morgan le Fay, my lady, hath
ordained a thirty ladies to seek and espy after Sir Launcelot or Sir
Tristram, and by the trains of these ladies, who that may first meet
with any of these two knights, they should turn them unto Morgan le
Fay's castle, saying that they should do deeds of worship, and if any
of those two knights came there, there be thirty knights lying and
watching in a tower to wait upon Sir Launcelot, or upon Sir Tristram.
Fie for shame, said Sir Gawaine, that ever such false treason should be
wrought or used in a queen and a king's sister, and a king and queen's
daughter.


CHAPTER XXVI.
-------------

_How Sir Tristram and Sir Gawaine rode to have fought against the
thirty knights, but they durst not come out._

Sir, said Sir Gawaine, will ye stand with me, and we will see the
malice of these thirty knights? Sir, said Sir Tristram, go ye to them
and it please you, and ye shall see I will not fail you, for it is not
long ago since I and a fellow met with thirty knights of that queen's
fellowship; and God speed us so that we may win worship. So then Sir
Gawaine and Sir Tristram rode toward the castle where Morgan le Fay
was, and ever Sir Gawaine deemed well that he was Sir Tristram de
Liones, because he heard that two knights had slain and beaten thirty
knights. And when they came afore the castle Sir Gawaine spake on high,
and said, Queen Morgan le Fay, send out your knights that ye have laid
in a watch for Sir Launcelot, and for Sir Tristram. Now, said Sir
Gawaine, I know your false treason, and through all places where that I
ride men shall know of your false treason. And now let see Sir Gawaine
whether ye dare come out of your castle ye thirty knights. Then the
queen spake and all the thirty knights at once, and said, Sir Gawaine,
full well wotest thou what thou dost and sayest; for we know thee
passing well; but all that thou speakest and dost thou sayest it upon
pride of that good knight that is there with thee. For there be some of
us that know full well the hands of that knight over all well, and wit
thou well, Sir Gawaine, it is more for his sake than for thine that we
will not come out of this castle. For wit ye well, Sir Gawaine, that
knight that beareth the arms of Cornwall we know him, and what he is.
Then Sir Gawaine and Sir Tristram departed, and rode on their ways a
day or two together, and there by adventure they met with Sir Kay and
Sir Sagramor le Desirous. And then they were glad of Sir Gawaine, and
he of them, but they wist not what he was with the shield of Cornwall
but by deeming. And thus they rode together a day or two. And then they
were ware of Sir Breuse Sance Pité chasing a lady for to have slain
her, for he had slain her lover before. Hold you all still, said Sir
Gawaine, and shew none of you forth, and ye shall see me reward yonder
false knight, for and he espy you he is so well horsed that he will
escape away. And then Sir Gawaine rode betwixt Sir Breuse and the lady,
and said, False knight, leave her and have ado with me. When Sir Breuse
saw no more but Sir Gawaine he feutred his spear, and Sir Gawaine
against him, and there Sir Breuse overthrew Sir Gawaine, and then he
rode over him and overthwart him twenty times, to have destroyed him;
and when Sir Tristram saw him do so villainous a deed, he hurled out
against him. And when Sir Breuse saw him with the shield of Cornwall,
he knew him well that it was Sir Tristram, and then he fled, and Sir
Tristram followed after him. And Sir Breuse Sance Pité was so horsed
that he went his way quite. And Sir Tristram followed him long, for he
would fain have been avenged upon him. And so when he had long chased
him he saw a fair well, and thither he rode to repose him, and tied his
horse to a tree.


CHAPTER XXVII.
--------------

_How damsel Bragwaine found Tristram sleeping by a well, and how she
delivered letters to him from La Beale Isoud._

And then he pulled off his helm, and washed his visage and his hands,
and so he fell on sleep. In the mean while came a damsel that had
sought Sir Tristram many ways and days within this land. And when she
came to the well she looked upon him, and had forgotten him as in
remembrance of Sir Tristram, but by his horse she knew him, that hight
Passe-Brewel, that had been Sir Tristram's horse many years. For when
he was mad in the forest, Sir Fergus kept him. So this lady dame
Bragwaine abode still till he was awake. So when she saw him wake she
saluted him, and he her again, for either knew other of old
acquaintance. Then she told him how she had sought him long and broad,
and there she told him how she had letters from queen La Beale Isoud.
Then anon Sir Tristram read them, and wit ye well he was glad, for
therein was many a piteous complaint. Then Sir Tristram said, Lady
Bragwaine, ye shall ride with me till that tournament be done at the
Castle of Maidens; and then shall ye bear letters and tidings with you.
And then Sir Tristram took his horse and sought lodging, and there he
met with a good ancient knight that prayed him to lodge with him. Right
so came Gouvernail unto Sir Tristram, that was glad of that lady. So
this old knight's name was Sir Pellounes, and he told of the great
tournament that should be at the Castle of Maidens. And there Sir
Launcelot and thirty-two knights of his blood had ordained shields of
Cornwall. And right so there came one unto Sir Pellounes and told him
that Sir Persides de Bloise was come home, and then that knight held up
his hands and thanked God of his coming home, and there Sir Pellounes
told Sir Tristram that in two years he had not seen his son Sir
Persides. Sir, said Sir Tristram, I know your son well enough for a
good knight. So on a time Sir Tristram and Sir Persides came to their
lodging both at once, and so they unarmed them, and put upon them their
clothing. And then these two knights each welcomed other. And when
Persides understood that Sir Tristram was of Cornwall, he said he was
once in Cornwall,--and there I justed afore king Mark, and so it happed
me at that time to overthrow ten knights, and then came to me Sir
Tristram de Liones and overthrew me, and took my lady from me, and that
I shall never forget, but I shall remember me and ever I see my time.
Ah, said Sir Tristram, now I understand that ye hate Sir Tristram. What
deem ye, ween ye that Sir Tristram is not able to withstand your
malice? Yes, said Sir Persides, I know well that Sir Tristram is a
noble knight, and a much better knight than I, yet shall I not owe him
my good will. Right as they stood thus talking at a bay window of that
castle, they saw many knights riding to and fro toward the tournament.
And then was Sir Tristram ware of a likely knight riding upon a great
black horse, and a black covered shield. What knight is that, said Sir
Tristram, with the black horse and the black shield? He seemeth to be a
good knight. I know him well, said Sir Persides, he is one of the best
knights of the world. Then is it Sir Launcelot, said Sir Tristram. Nay,
said Sir Persides, it is Sir Palamides, that is yet unchristened.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
---------------

_How Sir Tristram had a fall of Sir Palamides, and how Launcelot
overthrew two knights._

Then they saw much people of the country salute Sir Palamides. And
within a while after there came a squire of the castle that told Sir
Pellounes, that was lord of that castle, that a knight with a black
shield had smitten down thirteen knights. Fair brother, said Sir
Tristram unto Sir Persides, let us cast upon us our cloaks, and let us
go see the play. Not so, said Sir Persides, we will not go like knaves
thither, but we will ride like men and good knights to withstand our
enemies. So they armed them, and took their horses, and great spears,
and thither they went, there as many knights assayed themselves before
the tournament. And anon Sir Palamides saw Sir Persides, and then he
sent a squire unto him, and said, Go thou to the yonder knight with a
green shield and therein a lion of gold, and say to him I require him
to just with me, and tell him that my name is Sir Palamides. When Sir
Persides understood that request of Sir Palamides he made him ready.
And there anon they met together, but Sir Persides had a fall. Then Sir
Tristram dressed him to be revenged upon Sir Palamides. And that saw
Sir Palamides, that was ready, and so was not Sir Tristram, and took
him at advantage, and smote him over his horse tail when he had no
spear in his rest. Then start up Sir Tristram, and took his horse
lightly, and was wroth out of measure, and sore ashamed of that fall.
Then Sir Tristram sent unto Sir Palamides by Gouvernail his squire, and
prayed him to just with him at his request. Nay, said Sir Palamides, as
at this time I will not just with that knight, for I know him better
than he weeneth. And if he be wroth, he may right it to-morn at the
Castle of Maidens, where he may see me and many other knights. With
that came Sir Dinadan, and when he saw Sir Tristram wroth he list not
to jest. Lo, said Sir Dinadan, here may a man prove, be a man never so
good yet may he have a fall, and he was never so wise but he might be
overseen, and he rideth well that never fell. So Sir Tristram was
passing wroth, and said to Sir Persides and Sir Dinadan, I will revenge
me. Right so as they stood talking there, there came by Sir Tristram a
likely knight, riding passing soberly and heavily, with a black shield.
What knight is that? said Sir Tristram unto Sir Persides. I know him
well, said Sir Persides, for his name is Sir Briant of North Wales: so
he past on among other knights of North Wales. And there came in Sir
Launcelot du Lake with a shield of the arms of Cornwall, and he sent a
squire unto Sir Briant, and required him to just with him. Well, said
Sir Briant, since I am required to just I will do what I may. And there
Sir Launcelot smote down Sir Briant from his horse a great fall. And
then Sir Tristram marvelled what knight he was that bare the shield of
Cornwall. Whatsoever he be, said Sir Dinadan, I warrant you he is of
king Ban's blood, the which be knights of the most noble prowess in the
world, for to account so many for so many. Then there came two knights
of Northgalis, the one hight Hew de la Montaine, and the other Sir
Madok de la Montaine, and they challenged Sir Launcelot foot hot. Sir
Launcelot not refusing them, but made him ready, with one spear he
smote them down both over their horse croups, and so Sir Launcelot rode
his way. By my faith, said Sir Tristram, he is a good knight that
beareth the shield of Cornwall, and me seemeth he rideth in the best
manner that ever I saw knight ride. Then the king of Northgalis rode
unto Sir Palamides, and prayed him heartily for his sake to just with
that knight that hath done us of Northgalis despite. Sir, said Sir
Palamides, I am full loth to have ado with that knight, and cause why
is for as to-morn the great tournament shall be, and therefore I will
keep myself fresh by my will. Nay, said the king of Northgalis, I pray
you require him of justs. Sir, said Sir Palamides, I will just at your
request, and require that knight to just with me; and often I have seen
a man have a fall at his own request.


CHAPTER XXIX.
-------------

_How Sir Launcelot justed with Palamides and overthrew him, and after
he was assailed with twelve knights._

Then Sir Palamides sent unto Sir Launcelot a squire, and required him
of justs. Fair fellow, said Sir Launcelot, tell me thy lord's name.
Sir, said the squire, my lord's name is Sir Palamides the good knight.
In good hour, said Sir Launcelot, for there is no knight that I saw
this seven years that I had lever have ado withal than with him. And so
either knights made them ready with two great spears. Nay, said Sir
Dinadan, ye shall see that Sir Palamides will quit him right well. It
may be so, said Sir Tristram, but I undertake that knight with the
shield of Cornwall shall give him a fall. I believe it not, said Sir
Dinadan. Right so they spurred their horses, and feutred their spears,
and either hit other, and Sir Palamides brake a spear upon Sir
Launcelot, and he sat and moved not, but Sir Launcelot smote him so
lightly that he made his horse to avoid the saddle, and the stroke
brake his shield and the hauberk, and had he not fallen he had been
slain. How now, said Sir Tristram, I wist well by the manner of their
riding both that Sir Palamides should have a fall. Right so Sir
Launcelot rode his way, and rode to a well to drink and to repose him,
and they of Northgalis espied him whither he rode, and then there
followed him twelve knights for to have mischieved him, for this cause,
that upon the morn, at the tournament of the Castle of Maidens, that he
should not win the victory. So they came upon Sir Launcelot suddenly,
and scarcely he might put upon him his helm and take his horse but they
were in hands with him. And then Sir Launcelot gat his spear and rode
through them, and there he slew a knight, and brake his spear in his
body. Then he drew his sword and smote upon the right hand and upon the
left hand, so that within a few strokes he had slain other three
knights, and the remnant that abode he wounded them sore, all that did
abide. Thus Sir Launcelot escaped from his enemies of North Wales, and
then he rode forth on his way to a friend, and lodged him till on the
morn, for he would not the first day have ado in the tournament,
because of his great labour. And on the first day he was with king
Arthur, there as he was set on high upon a scaffold, to discern who was
best worthy of his deeds. So Sir Launcelot was with king Arthur, and
justed not the first day.


CHAPTER XXX.
------------

_How Sir Tristram behaved him the first day of the tournament, and
there he had the prize._

Now turn we unto Sir Tristram de Liones, that commanded Gouvernail his
servant to ordain him a black shield with none other remembrance
therein. And so Sir Persides and Sir Tristram departed from their host
Sir Pellounes and they rode early toward the tournament, and then they
drew them to king Carados' side of Scotland: and anon knights began the
field, what of the king of Northgalis' part, and what of king Carados'
part, and there began great party. Then there was hurling and rashing.
Right so came in Sir Persides and Sir Tristram, and so they did fare
that they put the king of Northgalis aback. Then came in Sir Bleoberis
de Ganis and Sir Gaheris with them of Northgalis, and then was Sir
Persides smitten down and almost slain, for more than forty horsemen
went over him. For Sir Bleoberis did great deeds of arms, and Sir
Gaheris failed him not. When Sir Tristram beheld them, and saw them do
such deeds of arms, he marvelled what they were. Also Sir Tristram
thought shame that Sir Persides was so done to; and then he gat a great
spear in his hand, and then he rode to Sir Gaheris and smote him down
from his horse. And then was Bleoberis wroth, and gat a spear and rode
against Sir Tristram in great ire, and there Sir Tristram met with him,
and smote Sir Bleoberis from his horse. So then the king with the
hundred knights was wroth, and he horsed Sir Bleoberis and Sir Gaheris
again, and there began a great meddle; and ever Sir Tristram held them
passing short, and ever Sir Bleoberis was passing busy upon Sir
Tristram. And there came Sir Dinadan against Sir Tristram, and Sir
Tristram gave him such a buffet that he swooned in his saddle. Then
anon Sir Dinadan came to Sir Tristram, and said, Sir, I know thee
better than thou weenest, but here I promise thee my troth I will never
come against thee more, for I promise thee that sword of thine shall
never come on my helm. With that came Sir Bleoberis, and Sir Tristram
gave him such a buffet that down he laid his head: and then he caught
him so sore by the helm that he pulled him under his horse feet. And
then king Arthur blew to lodging. Then Sir Tristram departed to his
pavilion, and Sir Dinadan rode with him. And Sir Persides and king
Arthur then, and the kings upon both parties, marvelled what knight
that was with the black shield. Many said their advice, and some knew
him for Sir Tristram, and held their peace, and would nought say. So
that first day king Arthur and all the kings and lords that were judges
gave Sir Tristram the prize, how be it they knew him not, but named him
the knight with the black shield.


CHAPTER XXXI.
-------------

_How Sir Tristram returned against king Arthur's party, because he saw
Sir Palamides on that party._

Then upon the morn Sir Palamides returned from the king of Northgalis,
and rode to king Arthur's side, where was king Carados, and the king of
Ireland, and Sir Launcelot's kin, and Sir Gawaine's kin. So Sir
Palamides sent the damsel unto Sir Tristram that he sent to seek him
when he was out of his mind in the forest; and this damsel asked Sir
Tristram what he was, and what was his name. As for that, said Sir
Tristram, tell Sir Palamides he shall not wit as at this time, unto the
time I have broken two spears upon him. But let him wit thus much, said
Sir Tristram, that I am the same knight that he smote down in over
evening at the tournament, and tell him plainly, on what part that Sir
Palamides be I will be on the contrary part. Sir, said the damsel, ye
shall understand that Sir Palamides will be on king Arthur's side,
where the most noble knights of the world be. Then, said Sir Tristram,
will I be with the king of Northgalis, because Sir Palamides will be on
king Arthur's side, and else I would not but for his sake. So when king
Arthur was come they blew unto the field, and then there began a great
party, and so king Carados justed with the king with the hundred
knights, and there king Carados had a fall; then there was hurling and
rashing, and right so came in knights of king Arthur's, and they bare
back the king of Northgalis' knights. Then Sir Tristram came in, and
began so roughly and so bigly that there was none might withstand him,
and thus Sir Tristram endured long. And at the last Sir Tristram fell
among the fellowship of king Ban, and there fell upon him Sir Bors de
Ganis, and Sir Ector de Maris, and Sir Blamor de Ganis, and many other
knights. And then Sir Tristram smote on the right hand and on the left
hand, that all lords and ladies spake of his noble deeds. But at the
last Sir Tristram should have had the worse had not the king with the
hundred knights been. And then he came with his fellowship and rescued
Sir Tristram, and brought him away from those knights that bare the
shields of Cornwall. And then Sir Tristram saw another fellowship by
themselves, and there were a forty knights together, and Sir Kay the
seneschal was their governor. Then Sir Tristram rode in amongst them,
and there he smote down Sir Kay from his horse, and there he fared
among those knights like a grey hound among conies. Then Sir Launcelot
found a knight that was sore wounded upon the head. Sir, said Sir
Launcelot, who wounded you so sore? Sir, he said, a knight that beareth
a black shield, and I may curse the time that ever I met with him, for
he is a devil and no man. So Sir Launcelot departed from him, and
thought to meet with Sir Tristram, and so he rode with his sword drawn
in his hand to seek Sir Tristram, and then he espied him how he hurled
here and there, and at every stroke Sir Tristram well nigh smote down a
knight. O mercy, said the king, sith the time I bare arms saw I never
no knight do so marvellous deeds of arms. And if I should set upon this
knight, said Sir Launcelot to himself, I did shame to myself; and
therewithal Sir Launcelot put up his sword. And then the king with the
hundred knights and a hundred more of North Wales set upon the twenty
of Sir Launcelot's kin: and they twenty knights held them ever together
as wild swine, and none would fail other. And so when Sir Tristram
beheld the noblesse of these twenty knights, he marvelled of their good
deeds, for he saw by their fare and by their rule, that they had lever
die than avoid the field. Now, said Sir Tristram, well may he be
valiant and full of prowess that hath such a sort of noble knights unto
his kin, and full like is he to be a noble man that is their leader and
governor. He meant it by Sir Launcelot du Lake. So when Sir Tristram
had beholden them long, he thought shame to see two hundred knights
battering upon twenty knights. Then Sir Tristram rode unto the king
with the hundred knights and said, Sir, leave your fighting with those
twenty knights, for ye win no worship of them, ye be so many, and they
so few; and wit ye well they will not out of the field, I see by their
cheer and countenance; and worship get ye none and ye slay them.
Therefore leave your fighting with them, for I to increase my worship I
will ride to the twenty knights and help them with all my might and
power. Nay, said the king with the hundred knights, ye shall not do so.
Now I see your courage and courtesy I will withdraw my knights for your
pleasure, for evermore a good knight will favour another, and like will
draw to like.


CHAPTER XXXII.
--------------

_How Sir Tristram found Palamides by a well, and brought him with him
to his lodging._

Then the king with the hundred knights withdrew his knights. And all
this while, and long tofore, Sir Launcelot had watched upon Sir
Tristram with a very purpose to have fellowshipped with him. And then
suddenly Sir Tristram, Sir Dinadan, and Gouvernail his man, rode their
way into the forest, that no man perceived where they went. So then
king Arthur blew unto lodging, and gave the king of Northgalis the
prize, because Sir Tristram was upon his side. Then Sir Launcelot rode
here and there, so wood as lion that wanted his fill, because he had
lost Sir Tristram, and so he returned unto king Arthur. And then in all
the field was a noise that with the wind it might be heard two mile
thence, how the lords and ladies cried. The knight with the black
shield hath won the field. Alas, said king Arthur, where is that knight
become? It is shame to all those in the field so to let him escape away
from you; but with gentleness and courtesy ye might have brought him
unto me to the Castle of Maidens. Then the noble king Arthur went unto
his knights, and comforted them in the best wise that he could, and
said, My fair fellows be not dismayed, howbeit ye have lost the field
this day. And many were hurt and sore wounded, and many were whole. My
fellows, said king Arthur, look that ye be of good cheer, for to-morrow
I will be in the field with you, and revenge you of your enemies.

So that night king Arthur and his knights reposed themselves. The
damsel that came from La Beale Isoud unto Sir Tristram, all the while
the tournament was a doing she was with queen Guenever, and ever the
queen asked her for what cause she came into that country. Madam, she
answered, I come for none other cause but from my lady La Beale Isoud
to wit of your welfare. For in no wise she would not tell the queen
that she came for Sir Tristram's sake. So this lady, dame Bragwaine,
took her leave of queen Guenever, and she rode after Sir Tristram. And
as she rode through the forest she heard a great cry, then she
commanded her squire to go into that forest to wit what was that noise.
And so he came to a well, and there he found a knight bound to a tree,
crying as he had been wood, and his horse and his harness standing by
him. And when he espied the squire, therewith he started and brake
himself loose, and took his sword in his hand, and ran to have slain
that squire. Then he took his horse and fled all that ever he might
unto dame Bragwaine again, and told her of his adventure. Then she rode
unto Sir Tristram's pavilion, and told Sir Tristram what adventure she
had found in the forest. Alas, said Sir Tristram, upon my head there is
some good knight at mischief. Then Sir Tristram took his horse and his
sword and rode thither, and there he heard how the knight complained
unto himself, and said, I, woeful knight, Sir Palamides, what
misadventure befalleth me, that thus am defoiled with falsehood and
treason, through Sir Bors and Sir Ector. Alas, he said, why live I so
long! And then he gat his sword in his hands, and made many strange
signs and tokens, and so through his raging he threw his sword into
that fountain. Then Sir Palamides wailed and wrang his hands. And at
the last, for pure sorrow, he ran into that fountain over his middle,
and sought after his sword. Then Sir Tristram saw that, and ran upon
Sir Palamides, and held him in his arms fast. What art thou, said Sir
Palamides, that holdeth me so? I am a man of this forest that would
thee none harm. Alas, said Sir Palamides, I may never win worship where
Sir Tristram is, for ever where he is and I be there then get I no
worship, and if he be away for the most part I have the gree, unless
that Sir Launcelot du Lake be there or Sir Lamorak. Then Sir Palamides
said: Once in Ireland Sir Tristram put me to the worse, and another
time in Cornwall, and in other places in this land. What would ye do,
said Sir Tristram, and ye had Sir Tristram? I would fight with him,
said Sir Palamides, and ease my heart upon him, and yet, to say the
sooth, Sir Tristram is the gentlest knight in this world living. What
will ye do? said Sir Tristram, will ye go with me to your lodging? Nay,
said he, I will go to the king with the hundred knights, for he rescued
me from Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Ector, and else had I been slain
traitourly. Sir Tristram said him such kind words that Sir Palamides
went with him to his lodging. Then Gouvernail went tofore and charged
dame Bragwaine to go out of the way to her lodging, and bid ye Sir
Persides that he make him no quarrels. And so they rode together till
they came to Sir Tristram's pavilion, and there Sir Palamides had all
the cheer that might be had all that night. But in no wise Sir
Palamides might not know what was Sir Tristram. And so after supper
they went to rest, and Sir Tristram for great travail slept till it was
day. And Sir Palamides might not sleep for anguish, and in the dawning
of the day he took his horse privily and rode his way unto Sir Gaheris
and to Sir Sagramor le Desirous, where they were in their pavilions,
for they three were fellows at the beginning of the tournament. And
then upon the morn the king blew unto the tournament upon the third day.


CHAPTER XXXIII.
---------------

_How Sir Tristram smote down Sir Palamides, and how he justed with king
Arthur, and other feats._

So the king of Northgalis and the king with the hundred knights, they
two encountered with king Carados and with the king of Ireland, and
there the king with the hundred knights smote down king Carados, and
the king of Northgalis smote down the king of Ireland. With that came
in Sir Palamides, and when he came he made great work, for by his
indented shield he was well known. So came in king Arthur and did great
deeds of arms together, and put the king of Northgalis and the king
with the hundred knights to the worse. With this came in Sir Tristram
with his black shield, and anon he justed with Sir Palamides, and there
by fine force Sir Tristram smote Sir Palamides over his horse croup.
Then king Arthur cried, Knight with the black shield make thee ready to
me. And in the same wise Sir Tristram smote king Arthur. And then by
force of king Arthur's knights the king and Sir Palamides were horsed
again. Then king Arthur with a great eager heart gat a spear in his
hand, and there upon the one side he smote Sir Tristram over his horse.
Then foot-hot Sir Palamides came upon Sir Tristram as he was on foot,
to have over-ridden him. Then Sir Tristram was ware of him, and there
he stooped aside, and with great ire he gat him by the arm, and pulled
him down from his horse. Then Sir Palamides lightly arose, and then
they dashed together mightily with their swords, and many kings,
queens, and lords stood and beheld them. And at the last Sir Tristram
smote Sir Palamides upon the helm three mighty strokes, and at every
stroke that he gave him he said, Have this for Sir Tristram's sake.
With that Sir Palamides fell to the earth groveling. And then came the
king with the hundred knights and brought Sir Tristram an horse, and so
was he horsed again. By then was Sir Palamides horsed, and with great
ire he justed upon Sir Tristram with his spear as it was in the rest,
and gave him a great dash with his spear. Then Sir Tristram avoided his
spear and gat him by the neck with his both hands, and pulled him clean
out of his saddle, and so he bare him afore him the length of ten
spears, and then in the presence of them all he let him fall at his
adventure. Then Sir Tristram was ware of king Arthur with a naked sword
in his hand, and with his spear Sir Tristram ran upon king Arthur, and
then king Arthur boldly abode him, and with his sword he smote a-two
his spear, and therewithal Sir Tristram was astonished, and so king
Arthur gave him three or four great strokes or he might get out his
sword, and at the last Sir Tristram drew his sword and assailed other
passing hard. With that the great press parted, then Sir Tristram rode
here and there and did his great pain, that eleven of the good knights
of the blood of king Ban, that was of Sir Launcelot's kin, that day Sir
Tristram smote down, that all the estates marvelled of his great deeds,
and all cried upon the knight with the black shield.


CHAPTER XXXIV.
--------------

_How Sir Launcelot hurt Sir Tristram, and how after Sir Tristram smote
down Palamides._

Then this cry was so large that Sir Launcelot heard it. And then he gat
a great spear in his hand, and came towards the cry. Then Sir Launcelot
cried, The knight with the black shield, make thee ready to just with
me. When Sir Tristram heard him say so, he gat his spear in his hand,
and either abashed down their heads, and came together as thunder, and
Sir Tristram's spear brake in pieces, and Sir Launcelot by mal-fortune
struck Sir Tristram on the side a deep wound nigh to the death. But yet
Sir Tristram avoided not his saddle, and so the spear brake:
therewithal Sir Tristram that was wounded gat out his sword, and he
rashed to Sir Launcelot, and gave him three great strokes upon the helm
that the fire spang there out, and Sir Launcelot abashed his head lowly
toward his saddle-bow. And therewithal Sir Tristram departed from the
field, for he felt him so wounded that he wend he should have died. And
Sir Dinadan espied him, and followed him into the forest. Then Sir
Launcelot abode and did many marvellous deeds. So when Sir Tristram was
departed by the forest side, he alight, and unlaced his harness and
refreshed his wound. Then wend Sir Dinadan that he should have died.
Nay, nay, said Sir Tristram, Dinadan never dread thee, for I am heart
whole, and of this wound I shall soon be whole by the mercy of God. By
that Sir Dinadan was ware where came Sir Palamides riding straight upon
them. And then Sir Tristram was ware that Sir Palamides came to have
destroyed him. And so Sir Dinadan gave him warning and said, Sir
Tristram, my lord, ye are so sore wounded that ye may not have ado with
him, therefore I will ride against him and do to him what I may; and if
I be slain ye may pray for my soul, and in the meanwhile ye may
withdraw you and go into the castle, or into the forest, that he shall
not meet with you. Sir Tristram smiled and said, I thank you, Sir
Dinadan, of your good will, but ye shall wit that I am able to handle
him. And then anon hastily he armed him and took his horse and gat a
great spear in his hand, and said to Sir Dinadan, Adieu, and rode
toward Sir Palamides a soft pace.

Then when Sir Palamides saw that, he made countenance to amend his
horse; but he did it for this cause, for he abode Sir Gaheris that came
after him. And when he was come, he rode toward Sir Tristram. Then Sir
Tristram sent unto Sir Palamides and required him to just with him; and
if he smote down Sir Palamides he would do no more to him; and if it so
happened that Sir Palamides smote down Sir Tristram he bad him do his
utterance. So they were accorded. Then they met together, and Sir
Tristram smote down Sir Palamides, that he had a grievous fall, so that
he lay still as he had been dead. And then Sir Tristram ran upon Sir
Gaheris, and he would not have justed, but whether he would or not Sir
Tristram smote him over his horse croup, that he lay still as though he
had been dead. And then Sir Tristram rode his way, and left Sir
Persides' squire within the pavilions, and Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan
rode to an old knight's place to lodge them. And that old knight had
five sons at the tournament, for whom he prayed heartily for their
coming home. And so, as the French book saith, they came home all five
well beaten.

And when Sir Tristram departed into the forest, Sir Launcelot held
alway the fight like hard as a man enraged that took no heed to
himself, and wit ye well there was many a noble knight against him. And
when king Arthur saw Sir Launcelot do so marvellous deeds of arms, he
then armed him, and took his horse and armour, and rode into the field
to help Sir Launcelot, and so many knights came in with king Arthur.
And to make short tale, in conclusion, the king of Northgalis and the
king of the hundred knights were put to the worse, and because Sir
Launcelot abode and was the last in the field, the prize was given him.
But Sir Launcelot would neither for king, queen, nor knight have the
prize. But where the cry was cried through the field, Sir Launcelot,
Sir Launcelot, hath won the field this day, Sir Launcelot let make
another cry contrary, Sir Tristram hath won the field, for he began
first, and last he hath endured, and so hath he done the first day, the
second, and the third day.


CHAPTER XXXV.
-------------

_How the prize of the third day was given to Sir Launcelot, and Sir
Launcelot gave it unto Sir Tristram._

Then all the estates and degrees high and low said of Sir Launcelot
great worship for the honour that he did unto Sir Tristram, and for
that honour doing to Sir Tristram he was at that time more praised and
renowned than if he had overthrown five hundred knights: and all the
people wholly for this gentleness, first the estates both high and low,
and after the commonalty, cried at once, Sir Launcelot hath won the
field, whosoever say nay. Then was Sir Launcelot wroth and ashamed, and
so therewithal he rode to king Arthur. Alas, said the king, we are all
dismayed that Sir Tristram is thus departed from us. Truly, said king
Arthur, he is one of the noblest knights that ever I saw hold spear or
sword in hand, and the most courteyest knight in his fighting, for full
hard I saw him, said king Arthur, when he smote Sir Palamides upon his
helm, thrice that he abashed his helm with his strokes, and also he
said, here is a stroke for Sir Tristram, and thus thrice he said. Then
king Arthur, Sir Launcelot, and Sir Dodinas le Savage took their horses
to seek Sir Tristram, and by the means of Sir Persides he had told king
Arthur where Sir Tristram was in his pavilion, but when they came there
Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan were gone. Then king Arthur and Sir
Launcelot were heavy, and returned again to the Castle of Maidens
making great dole for the hurt of Sir Tristram, and his sudden
departing. Truly, said king Arthur, I am more heavy that I cannot meet
with him than for all the hurts that all my knights have had at the
tournament. Right so came Sir Gaheris and told to king Arthur how Sir
Tristram had smitten down Sir Palamides, and it was at Sir Palamides's
own request. Alas, said king Arthur, that was great dishonour to Sir
Palamides, inasmuch as Sir Tristram was sore wounded, and now may we
all, kings, and knights, and men of worship, say that Sir Tristram may
be called a noble knight, and one of the best knights that ever I saw
the days of my life. For I will that ye all kings and knights know,
said king Arthur, that I never saw knight do so marvellously as he hath
done these three days, for he was the first that began, and that
longest held on, save this last day. And though he was hurt, it was a
manly adventure of two noble knights: and when two noble men encounter
needs must the one have the worse, like as God will suffer at that
time. As for me, said Sir Launcelot, for all the lands that ever my
father left me I would not have hurt Sir Tristram and I had known him
at that time. That I hurt him was for I saw not his shield, for if I
had seen his black shield I would not have meddled with him for many
causes, for late he did as much for me as ever knight did, and that is
well known that he had ado with thirty knights, and no help save Sir
Dinadan. And one thing shall I promise, said Sir Launcelot, Sir
Palamides shall repent it, as in his unkindly dealing for to follow
that noble knight that I by mishap hurt thus. Sir Launcelot said all
the worship that might be said by Sir Tristram. Then king Arthur made a
great feast to all that would come.

And thus let we pass king Arthur, and a little we will turn unto Sir
Palamides, that, after he had a fall of Sir Tristram, he was nigh hand
enraged out of his wit for despite of Sir Tristram. And so he followed
him by adventure. And as he came by a river in his woodness he would
have made his horse to have lept over; and the horse failed footing and
fell in the river, wherefore Sir Palamides was adread lest he should
have been drowned, and then he avoided his horse and swam to the land,
and let his horse go down by adventure.


CHAPTER XXXVI.
--------------

_How Sir Palamides came to the castle where Sir Tristram was, and of
the quest that Sir Launcelot and ten knights made for Sir Tristram._

And when he came to the land he took off his harness, and sat roaring
and crying as a man out of his mind. Right so came a damsel even by Sir
Palamides, that was sent from Sir Gawaine and his brother unto Sir
Mordred, that lay sick in the same place with that old knight where Sir
Tristram was. For, as the French book saith, Sir Persides hurt so Sir
Mordred a ten days afore; and had it not been for the love of Sir
Gawaine and his brother, Sir Persides had slain Sir Mordred. And so
this damsel came by Sir Palamides, and she and he had language
together, the which pleased neither of them: and so the damsel rode her
ways till she came to the old knight's place, and there she told that
old knight how she had met with the woodest knight by adventure that
ever she met withal. What bare he in his shield? said Sir Tristram. It
was indented with white and black, said the damsel. Ah, said Sir
Tristram, that was Sir Palamides the good knight, for well I know him,
said Sir Tristram, for one of the best knights living in this realm.
Then that old knight took a little hackney, and rode for Sir Palamides,
and brought him unto his own manor; and then full well knew Sir
Tristram Sir Palamides, but he said but little, for at that time Sir
Tristram was walking upon his feet, and well amended of his hurts, and
always when Sir Palamides saw Sir Tristram he would behold him full
marvellously. And ever him seemed that he had seen him. Then would he
say to Sir Dinadan, And ever I may meet with Sir Tristram, he shall not
escape my hands. I marvel, said Sir Dinadan, that ye boast behind Sir
Tristram, for it is but late that he was in your hands, and ye in his
hands; why would ye not hold him when ye had him? for I saw myself
twice or thrice that ye gat but little worship of Sir Tristram. Then
was Sir Palamides ashamed. So leave we them a little while in the
castle with the old knight Sir Darras.

Now shall we speak of king Arthur, that said to Sir Launcelot, Had not
ye been, we had not lost Sir Tristram, for he was here daily unto the
time ye met with him, and in an evil time, said Arthur, ye encountered
with him. My lord Arthur, said Launcelot, ye put upon me that I should
be cause of his departure: truly it was against my will. But when men
be hot in deeds of arms, often they hurt their friends as well as their
foes; and my lord, said Sir Launcelot, ye shall understand that Sir
Tristram is a man that I am loth to offend, for he hath done for me
more than ever I did for him as yet. But then Sir Launcelot made to
bring forth a book, and then Sir Launcelot said, Here we are ten
knights that will swear upon a book never to rest one night where we
rest another, this twelvemonth, until that we find Sir Tristram. And as
for me, said Sir Launcelot, I promise you upon this book that and I may
meet with him, either by fairness or foulness I shall bring him to this
court, or else I shall die therefore. And the names of these ten
knights that had undertaken this quest were these following. First was
Sir Launcelot; Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Bors de Ganis, and Bleoberis,
and Sir Blamor de Ganis, and Lucan the butler, Sir Uwaine, Sir Galihud,
Sir Lionel, and Galiodin. So these ten noble knights departed from the
court of king Arthur; and so they rode upon their quest together until
they came to a cross where departed four highways, and there departed
the fellowship in four, to seek Sir Tristram. And as Sir Launcelot rode
by adventure he met with dame Bragwaine, that was sent into that
country to seek Sir Tristram, and she fled as fast as her palfrey might
go. So Sir Launcelot met with her, and asked her why she fled. Ah, fair
knight, said dame Bragwaine, I flee for dread of my life, for here
followeth me Sir Breuse Sance Pité to slay me. Hold you nigh me, said
Sir Launcelot. Then when Sir Launcelot saw Sir Breuse Sance Pité, Sir
Launcelot cried unto him and said, False knight, destroyer of ladies
and damsels, now thy last days be come. When Sir Breuse Sance Pité saw
Sir Launcelot's shield he knew it well, for at that time he bare not
the arms of Cornwall, but he bare his own shield. And then Sir Breuse
fled, and Sir Launcelot followed after him. But Sir Breuse was so well
horsed, that when him list to flee he might well flee, and also abide
when him list. And then Sir Launcelot returned unto dame Bragwaine, and
she thanked him of his great labour.


CHAPTER XXXVII.
---------------

_How Sir Tristram, Sir Palamides, and Sir Dinadan were taken and put in
prison._

Now will we speak of Sir Lucan the butler, that by fortune came riding
to the same place there as was Sir Tristram, and in he came in none
other intent but to ask harbour. Then the porter asked what was his
name. Tell your lord that my name is Sir Lucan the butler, a knight of
the Round Table. So the porter went unto Sir Darras, lord of the place,
and told him who was there to ask harbour. Nay, nay, said Sir Daname,
that was nephew unto Sir Darras, say him that he shall not be lodged
here. But let him wit that I Sir Daname will meet with him anon, and
bid him make him ready. So Sir Daname came forth on horseback, and
there they met together with spears, and Sir Lucan smote down Sir
Daname over his horse croup, and then he fled into that place, and Sir
Lucan rode after him, and asked after him many times. Then Sir Dinadan
said to Sir Tristram, It is shame to see the lord's cousin of this
place defoiled. Abide, said Sir Tristram, and I shall redress it. And
in the mean while Sir Dinadan was on horseback, and he justed with
Lucan the butler, and there Sir Lucan smote Dinadan through the thick
of the thigh, and so he rode his way, and Sir Tristram was wroth that
Sir Dinadan was hurt, and followed after, and thought to avenge him.
And within a mile he overtook Sir Lucan and bade him turn: and so they
met together, so that Sir Tristram hurt Sir Lucan passing sore, and
gave him a fall. With that came Sir Uwaine, a gentle knight, and when
he saw Sir Lucan so hurt, he called Sir Tristram to just with him. Fair
knight, said Sir Tristram, tell me your name I require you. Sir knight,
wit ye well my name is Sir Uwaine le Fise de Roy Ureine. Ah, said Sir
Tristram, by my will I would not have ado with you at no time. Ye shall
not so, said Sir Uwaine, but ye shall have ado with me. And then Sir
Tristram saw none other boot, but rode against him, and overthrew Sir
Uwaine, and hurt him in the side, and so he departed unto his lodging
again. And when Sir Dinadan understood that Sir Tristram had hurt Sir
Lucan, he would have ridden after Sir Lucan to have slain him, but Sir
Tristram would not suffer him.

Then Sir Uwaine let ordain an horse-litter, and brought Sir Lucan to
the abbey of Ganis, and the castle thereby hight the castle of Ganis,
of the which Sir Bleoberis was lord. And at that castle Sir Launcelot
promised all his fellows to meet in the quest of Sir Tristram. So when
Sir Tristram was come to his lodging, there came a damsel that told Sir
Darras that three of his sons were slain at that tournament, and two
grievously wounded that they were never like to help themselves, and
all this was done by a noble knight that bare the black shield, and
that was he that bare the prize. Then came there one and told Sir
Darras that the same knight was within him that bare the black shield.
Then Sir Darras went unto Sir Tristram's chamber, and there he found
his shield and shewed it to the damsel. Ah, sir, said the damsel, that
same is he that slew your three sons. Then without any tarrying Sir
Darras put Sir Tristram, and Sir Palamides, and Sir Dinadan within a
strong prison, and there Sir Tristram was like to have died of great
sickness, and every day Sir Palamides would reprove Sir Tristram of old
hate betwixt them. And ever Sir Tristram spake fair and said little.
But when Sir Palamides saw the falling of sickness of Sir Tristram then
was he heavy for him, and comforted him in all the best wise he could.
And, as the French book saith, there came forty knights to Sir Darras
that were of his own kin, and they would have slain Sir Tristram and
his two fellows, but Sir Darras would not suffer that, but kept them in
prison, and meat and drink they had. So Sir Tristram endured there
great pain, for sickness had undertaken him, and that is the greatest
pain a prisoner may have. For all the while a prisoner may have his
health of body, he may endure under the mercy of God, and in hope of
good deliverance; but when sickness toucheth a prisoner's body, then
may a prisoner say all wealth is him bereft, and then he hath cause to
wail and to weep. And so did Sir Tristram when sickness had undertaken
him, for then he took such sorrow that he had almost slain himself.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.
----------------

_How king Mark was sorry for the good renown of Sir Tristram: some of
king Arthur's knights justed with knights of Cornwall._

Now will we speak, and leave Sir Tristram, Sir Palamides, and Sir
Dinadan in prison, and speak we of other knights that sought after Sir
Tristram many divers parts of this land. And some went into Cornwall,
and by adventure Sir Gaheris, nephew unto king Arthur, came unto king
Mark, and there he was well received, and sat at king Mark's own table
and eat of his own mess. Then king Mark asked Sir Gaheris what tidings
there were in the realm of Logris. Sir, said Sir Gaheris, the king
reigneth as a noble knight, and now but late there was a great justs
and tournament as ever I saw any in the realm of Logris, and the most
noble knights were at that justs. But there was one knight that did
marvellously three days, and he bare a black shield, and of all knights
that ever I saw he proved the best knight. Then said king Mark, That
was Sir Launcelot, or Sir Palamides the Paynim. Not so, said Sir
Gaheris, for both Sir Launcelot and Sir Palamides were on the contrary
part against the knight with the black shield. Then it was Sir
Tristram, said the king. Yea, said Sir Gaheris. And therewith the king
smote down his head, and in his heart he feared sore that Sir Tristram
should get him such worship in the realm of Logris, where through that
he himself should not be able to withstand him. Thus Sir Gaheris had
great cheer with king Mark, and with queen La Beale Isoud, the which
was glad of Sir Gaheris' words; for well she wist by his deeds and
manners that it was Sir Tristram. And then the king made a feast royal,
and unto that feast came Sir Uwaine le Fise de Roy Ureine, and some
folk called him Uwaine le Blanche Mains. And this Sir Uwaine challenged
all the knights of Cornwall. Then was the king wood wroth that he had
no knights to answer him. Then Sir Andred, nephew unto king Mark, lept
up and said, I will encounter with Sir Uwaine. Then he went and armed
him, and horsed him in the best manner. And there Sir Uwaine met with
Sir Andred and smote him down, that he swooned on the earth. Then was
king Mark sorry and wroth out of measure that he had no knight to
revenge his nephew Sir Andred. So the king called unto him Sir Dinas
the seneschal, and prayed him for his sake to take upon him to just
with Sir Uwaine. Sir, said Sir Dinas, I am full loth to have ado with
any knight of the Round Table. Yet, said the king, for my love take
upon thee to just. So Sir Dinas made him ready, and anon they
encountered together with great spears, but Sir Dinas was overthrown,
horse and man, a great fall. Who was wroth but king Mark? Alas, he
said, have I no knight that will encounter with yonder knight. Sir,
said Sir Gaheris, for your sake I will just. So Sir Gaheris made him
ready, and when he was armed he rode into the field. And when Sir
Uwaine saw Sir Gaheris' shield, he rode unto him and said, Sir, ye do
not your part; for, sir, the first time ye were made knight of the
Round Table ye sware that ye should not have ado with your fellowship
wittingly. And pardy Sir Gaheris, ye knew me well enough by my shield,
and so do I know you by your shield, and though ye would break your
oath I would not break mine, for there is not one here, nor ye, that
shall think I am afraid of you, but I durst right well have ado with
you, but we be sisters' sons. Then was Sir Gaheris ashamed. And so
therewithal every knight went his way, and Sir Uwaine rode into the
country. Then king Mark armed him and took his horse and his spear,
with a squire with him. And then he rode afore Sir Uwaine, and suddenly
at a gap he ran upon him as he that was not ware of him, and there he
smote him almost through the body, and there left him. So within a
while there came Sir Kay, and found Sir Uwaine, and asked him how he
was hurt. I wot not, said Sir Uwaine, why, nor wherefore, but by
treason I am sure I gat this hurt, for here came a knight suddenly upon
me or that I was ware, and suddenly hurt me. Then there was come Sir
Andred to seek king Mark. Thou traitor knight, said Sir Kay, and I wist
it were thou that thus traitourly hast hurt this noble knight, thou
shouldst never pass my hands. Sir, said Sir Andred, I did never hurt
him, and that I will report me to himself. Fie on you, false knights,
said Sir Kay, for ye of Cornwall are nought worth. So Sir Kay made
carry Sir Uwaine to the abbey of the black cross, and there he was
healed. And then Sir Gaheris took his leave of king Mark. But or he
departed he said, Sir king, ye did a foul shame unto you and your court
when ye banished Sir Tristram out of this country, for ye needed not to
have doubted no knight and he had been here. And so he departed.


CHAPTER XXXIX.
--------------

_Of the treason of king Mark, and how Sir Gaheris, smote him down and
Andred his cousin._

Then there came Sir Kay the seneschal unto king Mark, and there he had
good cheer shewing outward. Now fair lords, said he, will ye prove any
adventures in the forest of Morris, in the which I know well is as hard
an adventure as I know any. Sir, said Sir Kay, I will prove it. And Sir
Gaheris said he would be advised, for king Mark was ever full of
treason. And therewithal Sir Gaheris departed and rode his way. And by
the same way that Sir Kay should ride he laid him down to rest,
charging his squire to wait upon Sir Kay,--and warn me when he cometh.
So within a while Sir Kay came riding that way. And then Sir Gaheris
took his horse and met him, and said, Sir Kay, ye are not wise to ride
at the request of king Mark, for he dealeth all with treason. Then said
Sir Kay, I require you let us prove this adventure. I shall not fail
you, said Sir Gaheris. And so they rode that time till a lake that was
that time called the perilous lake, and there they abode under the
shawe of the wood. The mean while king Mark within the castle of
Tintagil avoided all his barons, and all other save such as were privy
with him were all avoided out of his chamber. And then he let call his
nephew Sir Andred, and bad arm him and horse him lightly, and by that
time it was midnight. And so king Mark was armed in black, horse and
all. And so at a privy postern they two issued out with their varlets
with them, and rode till they came to that lake. Then Sir Kay espied
them first, and gat his spear, and proffered to just. And king Mark
rode against him, and smote each other full hard, for the moon shone as
the bright day. And there at that justs Sir Kay's horse fell down, for
his horse was not so big as the king's horse was, and Sir Kay's horse
bruised him full sore. Then Sir Gaheris was wroth that Sir Kay had a
fall. Then he cried, Knight, sit thou fast in thy saddle, for I will
revenge my fellow. Then king Mark was afeard of Sir Gaheris, and so
with evil will king Mark rode against him: and Sir Gaheris gave him
such a stroke that he fell down. So then forthwithal Sir Gaheris ran
unto Sir Andred, and smote him from his horse quite that his helm smote
in the earth and nigh had broken his neck. And therewith Sir Gaheris
alight, and gat up Sir Kay. And then they went both on foot to them,
and bad them yield them and tell their names, or else they should die.
Then with great pain Sir Andred spake first and said, It is king Mark
of Cornwall, therefore beware what ye do, and I am Sir Andred his
cousin. Fie on you both, said Sir Gaheris, for a false traitor, and
false treason hast thou wrought and he both, under the feigned cheer
that ye made us. It were pity, said Sir Gaheris, that thou shouldst
live any longer. Save my life, said king Mark, and I will make amends;
and consider that I am a king anointed. It were the more shame, said
Sir Gaheris, to save thy life; thou art a king anointed with crism, and
therefore thou shouldest hold with all men of worship; and therefore
thou art worthy to die. With that he lashed at king Mark without saying
any more; and he covered him with his shield, and defended him as he
might. And then Sir Kay lashed at Sir Andred. And therewithal king Mark
yielded him unto Sir Gaheris, and then he kneeled down, and made his
oath upon the cross of the sword that never while he lived he would be
against errant knights. And also he sware to be good friend unto Sir
Tristram, if ever he came into Cornwall. By then Sir Andred was on the
earth, and Sir Kay would have slain him. Let be, said Sir Gaheris, slay
him not I pray you. It were pity, said Sir Kay, that he should live any
longer, for this is nigh cousin unto Sir Tristram, and ever he hath
been a traitor unto him, and by him he was exiled out of Cornwall, and
therefore I will slay him, said Sir Kay. Ye shall not, said Sir
Gaheris; sithen I have given the king his life, I pray you give him his
life. And therewithal Sir Kay let him go. And so Sir Kay and Sir
Gaheris rode forth their way unto Dinas the seneschal, for because they
heard say that he loved well Sir Tristram. So they reposed them there.
And soon after they rode unto the realm of Logris. And so within a
little while they met with Sir Launcelot, that had always dame
Bragwaine with him, to that intent he wend to have met sooner with Sir
Tristram, and Sir Launcelot asked what tidings in Cornwall, and whether
they heard of Sir Tristram or not. Sir Kay and Sir Gaheris answered and
said that they heard not of him. Then they told Sir Launcelot word by
word of their adventure. Then Sir Launcelot smiled, and said, Hard it
is to take out of the flesh that is bred in the bone. And so made them
merry together.


CHAPTER XL.
-----------

_How after that Sir Tristram, Sir Palamides, and Sir Dinadan had been
long in prison they were delivered._

Now leave we off this tale and speak we of Sir Dinas that loved a lady
within the castle, and she loved another knight better than him. And so
when Sir Dinas went out on hunting she slipped down by a towel, and
took with her two brachets, and so she went to the knight that she
loved. And when Sir Dinas came home and missed his lady, and his
brachets, then was he more wroth for his brachets than for the lady. So
then he rode after the knight that had his lady, and bad him turn and
just. So Sir Dinas smote him down, that with the fall he brake his leg
and his arm. And then his lady cried Sir Dinas mercy, and said she
would love him better than ever she did. Nay, said Sir Dinas, I shall
never trust them that once betrayed me, and therefore as ye have begun
so end, for I will never meddle with you. And so Sir Dinas departed and
took his brachets with him, and so rode to his castle.

Now will we turn unto Sir Launcelot, that was right heavy that he could
never hear no tidings of Sir Tristram, for all this while he was in
prison with Sir Darras, Palamides, and Dinadan. Then dame Bragwaine
took her leave to go into Cornwall, and Sir Launcelot, Sir Kay, and Sir
Gaheris rode to seek Sir Tristram in the country of Surluse. Now
speaketh this tale of Sir Tristram and of his two fellows, for every
day Sir Palamides brawled and said language against Sir Tristram. I
marvel, said Sir Dinadan, of thee Sir Palamides: and thou hadst Sir
Tristram here thou wouldst do him no harm; for and a wolf and a sheep
were together in prison, the wolf would suffer the sheep to be in
peace. And wit thou well, said Sir Dinadan, this same is Sir Tristram
at a word, and now mayest thou do thy best with him, and let see now
how ye can shift it with your hands. Then was Sir Palamides abashed and
said little. Sir Palamides, said Sir Tristram, I have heard much of
your ill-will against me, but I will not meddle with you as at this
time by my will, because I dread the lord of this place that hath us in
governance, for and I dread him more than I do thee, soon should it be
shift. So they appeased themselves. Right so came in a damsel and said,
Knights, be of good cheer, for ye are sure of your lives, and that I
heard say my lord Sir Darras. Then were they glad all three, for daily
they wend they should have died. Then soon after this Sir Tristram fell
sick, that he wend to have died. Then Sir Dinadan wept, and so did Sir
Palamides under them both making great sorrow. So a damsel came into
them, and found them mourning. Then she went to Sir Darras and told him
how that mighty knight that bare the black shield was likely to die.
That shall not be, said Sir Darras, for God defend when any knights
come to me for succour that I should suffer them to die within my
prison. Therefore, said Sir Darras to the damsel, fetch that knight and
his fellows afore me. And then anon when Sir Darras saw Sir Tristram
afore him, he said, Sir knight, me repenteth of thy sickness, for thou
art called a full noble knight, and so it seemeth by thee. And wit ye
well, it shall never be said that Sir Darras shall destroy such a noble
knight as thou art in prison, howbeit that thou hast slain three of my
sons, whereby I was greatly agrieved. But now shalt thou go and thy
fellows, and your harness and horses have been fair and clean kept, and
ye shall go where it liketh you, upon this covenant, that thou, knight,
will promise me to be good friend to my sons two that be now on live,
and also that thou tell me thy name. Sir, said he, as for me, my name
is Sir Tristram de Liones, and in Cornwall was I born, and nephew I am
unto king Mark. And as for the death of your sons, I might not do
withal, for and they had been the next kin that I have, I might have
done none otherwise. And if I had slain them by treason or treachery, I
had been worthy to have died. All this I consider, said Sir Darras,
that all that ye did was by force of knighthood, and that was the cause
I would not put you to death. But since ye be Sir Tristram the good
knight, I pray you heartily to be my good friend and to my sons. Sir,
said Sir Tristram, I promise you by the faith of my body ever while I
live I will do you service, for ye have done to us but as a natural
knight ought to do. Then Sir Tristram reposed him there till that he
was amended of his sickness. And when he was big and strong they took
their leave, and every knight took their horses and so departed, and
rode together till they came to a cross way. Now fellows, said Sir
Tristram, here will we depart in sundry ways. And because Sir Dinadan
had the first adventure, of him I will begin.


CHAPTER XLI.
------------

_How Sir Dinadan rescued a lady from Sir Breuse Sance Pité, and how Sir
Tristram received a shield of Morgan le Fay._

So as Sir Dinadan rode by a well, he found a lady making great dole.
What aileth you? said Sir Dinadan. Sir knight, said the lady, I am the
wofullest lady of the world, for within these five days here came a
knight called Sir Breuse Sance Pité, and he slew mine own brother, and
ever since he hath kept me at his own will, and of all men in the world
I hate him most. And therefore I require you of knighthood to avenge
me, for he will not tarry but be here anon. Let him come, said Sir
Dinadan, and because of honour of all women I will do my part. With
this came Sir Breuse, and when he saw a knight with his lady, he was
wood wroth. And then he said, Sir knight, keep thee from me. So they
hurled together as thunder, and either smote other passing sore. But
Sir Dinadan put him through the shoulder a grievous wound, and or ever
Sir Dinadan might turn him, Sir Breuse was gone and fled. Then the lady
prayed him to bring her to a castle there beside but four mile thence.
And so Sir Dinadan brought her there, and she was welcome, for the lord
of that castle was her uncle. And so Sir Dinadan rode his way upon his
adventure.

Now turn we this tale unto Sir Tristram, that by adventure he came to a
castle to ask lodging, wherein was queen Morgan le Fay. And so when Sir
Tristram was let into that castle he had good cheer all that night. And
upon the morn when he would have departed, the queen said, Wit ye well
ye shall not depart lightly, for ye are here as a prisoner. God defend,
said Sir Tristram, for I was but late a prisoner. Fair knight, said the
queen, ye shall abide with me till that I wit what ye are, and from
whence ye come. And ever the queen would set Sir Tristram on her side,
and her paramour on the other side, and ever queen Morgan would behold
Sir Tristram, and thereat the knight was jealous, and was in will
suddenly to have run upon Sir Tristram with a sword, but he left it for
shame. Then the queen said to Sir Tristram, Tell me thy name, and I
shall suffer you to depart when you will. Upon that covenant I tell you
my name is Sir Tristram de Liones. Ah, said Morgan le Fay, and I had
wist that thou shouldst not have departed so soon as thou shalt: but
sithen I have made a promise I will hold it, with that thou wilt
promise me to bear upon thee a shield that I shall deliver thee, unto
the castle of the Hard Rock, where king Arthur hath cried a great
tournament, and there I pray you that ye will be, and to do for me as
much deeds of arms as ye may do. For at that Castle of Maidens, Sir
Tristram, ye did marvellous deeds of arms as ever I heard knight do.
Madam, said Sir Tristram, let me see the shield that I shall bear. So
the shield was brought forth, and the shield was goldish, with a king
and a queen therein painted, and a knight standing above them, with one
foot upon the king's head, and the other upon the queen's. Madam, said
Sir Tristram, this is a fair shield and a mighty; but what signifieth
this king and this queen and that knight standing upon both their
heads. I shall tell you, said Morgan le Fay, it signifieth king Arthur
and queen Guenever, and a knight that holdeth them both in bondage and
servage. Who is that knight? said Sir Tristram. That shall ye not wit
as at this time, said the queen. But, as the French book saith, queen
Morgan loved Sir Launcelot best, and ever she desired him, and he would
never love her, nor do nothing at her request, and therefore she held
many knights together for to have taken him by strength. And because
she deemed that Sir Launcelot loved queen Guenever, and she him again,
therefore queen Morgan le Fay ordained that shield to put Sir Launcelot
to a rebuke, to that intent that king Arthur might understand the love
between them. Then Sir Tristram took that shield and promised her to
bear it at the tournament at the castle of the Hard Rock. But Sir
Tristram knew not that shield was ordained against Sir Launcelot, but
afterward he knew it.


CHAPTER XLII.
-------------

_How Sir Tristram took with him the shield, and also how he slew the
paramour of Morgan le Fay._

So then Sir Tristram took his leave of the queen, and took the shield
with him. Then came the knight that held queen Morgan le Fay, his name
was Sir Hemison, and he made him ready to follow Sir Tristram. Fair
friend, said Morgan, ride not after that knight, for ye shall win no
worship of him. Fie on him, coward, said Sir Hemison, for I wist never
good knight come out of Cornwall, but if it were Sir Tristram de
Liones. What and that be he, said she. Nay, nay, said he, he is with La
Beale Isoud, and this is but a daffish knight. Alas my fair friend, ye
shall find him the best knight that ever ye met withal, for I know him
better than ye do. For your sake, said Sir Hemison, I shall slay him.
Ah, fair friend, said the queen, me repenteth that ye will follow that
knight, for I fear me sore of your again coming. With this, this knight
rode his way wood wroth, and he rode after Sir Tristram as fast as he
had been chased with knights. When Sir Tristram heard a knight come
after him so fast, he returned about, and saw a knight coming against
him. And when he came nigh to Sir Tristram, he cried on high, Sir
knight, keep thee from me. Then they rushed together as it had been
thunder, and Sir Hemison bruised his spear upon Sir Tristram, but his
harness was so good that he might not hurt him. And Sir Tristram smote
him harder, and bare him through the body, and he fell over his horse
croup. Then Sir Tristram turned to have done more with his sword, but
he saw so much blood go from him, that him seemed he was likely to die;
and so he departed from him and came to a fair manor to an old knight,
and there Sir Tristram lodged.


CHAPTER XLIII.
--------------

_How Morgan le Fay buried her paramour, and how Sir Tristram praised
Sir Launcelot and his kin._

Now leave we to speak of Sir Tristram, and speak we of the knight that
was wounded to the death. Then his varlet alight, and took off his
helm; and then he asked his master whether there were any life in him.
There is in me life, said the knight, but it is but little, and
therefore leap thou up behind me, when thou hast holpen me up; and hold
me fast that I fall not, and bring me to queen Morgan le Fay, for deep
draughts of death draw to my heart, that I may not live, for I would
fain speak with her or I died. For else my soul will be in great peril
and I die. And with great pain his varlet brought him to the castle,
and there Sir Hemison fell down dead. When Morgan le Fay saw him dead,
she made great sorrow out of reason. And then she let despoil him unto
his shirt, and so she let him put into a tomb. And about the tomb she
let write: Here lieth Sir Hemison, slain by the hands of Sir Tristram
de Liones. Now turn we unto Sir Tristram, that asked the knight, his
host, if he saw late any knights adventurous. Sir, he said, the last
night here lodged with me Sir Ector de Maris and a damsel with him, and
that damsel told me that he was one of the best knights of the world.
That is not so, said Sir Tristram, for I know four better knights of
his own blood; and the first is Sir Launcelot du Lake, call him the
best knight; and Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Blamor de Ganis,
and Sir Gaheris. Nay, said his host, Sir Gawaine is a better knight
than he. That is not so, said Sir Tristram, for I have met with them
both, and I felt Sir Gaheris for the better knight; and Sir Lamorak, I
call him as good as any of them, except Sir Launcelot. Why name ye not
Sir Tristram, said his host, for I account him as good as any of them.
I know not Sir Tristram, said Tristram. Thus they talked and jested as
long as them list, and then went to rest. And on the morn Sir Tristram
departed and took his leave of his host, and rode towards the
Roche-dure, and none adventure had Sir Tristram but that, and so he
rested not till he came to the castle, where he saw five hundred tents.


CHAPTER XLIV.
-------------

_How Sir Tristram at a tournament bare the shield that Morgan le Fay
had delivered him._

Then the king of Scots and the king of Ireland held against king
Arthur's knights, and there began a great meddle. So came in Sir
Tristram and did marvellous deeds of arms, for there he smote down many
knights. And ever he was afore king Arthur with that shield. And when
king Arthur saw that shield, he marvelled greatly in what intent it was
made. But queen Guenever deemed as it was, wherefore she was heavy.
Then was there a damsel of queen Morgan in a chamber by king Arthur,
and when she heard king Arthur speak of that shield, then she spake
openly unto king Arthur, Sir king, wit ye well this shield was ordained
for you, to warn you of your shame and dishonour, and that longeth to
you and to your queen. And then anon the damsel piked her away privily,
that no man wist where she was become. Then was king Arthur sad and
wroth, and asked from whence came that damsel. There was not one that
knew her, nor wist where she was become. Then queen Guenever called to
her Sir Ector de Maris, and there she made her complaint to him, and
said, I wot well this shield was made by Morgan le Fay, in despite of
me and Sir Launcelot, wherefore I dread sore lest I should be
destroyed. And ever the king beheld Sir Tristram that did so marvellous
deeds of arms, that he wondered sore what knight he might be, and well
he wist it was not Sir Launcelot. And it was told him that Sir Tristram
was in Petit Britain with Isoud la Blanche Mains, for he deemed, and he
had been in the realm of Logris, Sir Launcelot or some of his fellows
that were in the quest of Sir Tristram, that they should have found him
or that time. So king Arthur had marvel what knight he might be. And
ever Sir Arthur's eye was on that shield. All that espied the queen,
and that made her sore afeard. Then ever Sir Tristram smote down
knights, wonderly to behold, what upon the right hand and upon the left
hand, that unneth no knight might withstand him. And the king of Scots
and the king of Ireland began to withdraw them. When Arthur espied
that, he thought that that knight with the strange shield should not
escape him. Then he called unto him Sir Uwaine la Blanche Mains, and
bade him arm him and make him ready. So anon king Arthur and Sir Uwaine
dressed them before Sir Tristram, and required him to tell them where
he had that shield. Sir, he said, I had it of queen Morgan le Fay,
sister unto king Arthur.

End of the Ninth Book.
======================
