The Twelfth Book.
=================

CHAPTER I.
----------

_How Sir Launcelot in his madness took a sword and fought with a
knight, and after lept into a bed._

And now leave we of a while of Sir Ector and of Sir Percivale, and
speak we of Sir Launcelot, that suffered and endured many sharp
showers, that ever ran wild wood from place to place, and lived by
fruit and such as he might get, and drank water two year, and other
clothing had he but little but his shirt and his breeches. Thus as Sir
Launcelot wandered here and there, he came in a fair meadow where he
found a pavilion, and there by upon a tree there hung a white shield,
and two swords hung thereby, and two spears leaned there by a tree. And
when Sir Launcelot saw the swords, anon he lept to the one sword, and
took it in his hand and drew it out. And then he lashed at the shield
that all the meadow rang of the dints, that he gave such a noise as ten
knights had foughten together. Then came forth a dwarf and lept unto
Sir Launcelot, and would have had the sword out of his hand, and then
Sir Launcelot took him by the both shoulders, and threw him to the
ground upon his neck, that he had almost broken his neck, and
therewithal the dwarf cried, Help. Then came forth a likely knight, and
well apparelled in scarlet furred with meniver. And anon as he saw Sir
Launcelot, he deemed that he should be out of his wit: and then he said
with fair speech, Good man, lay down that sword, for, as me seemeth,
thou hast more need of sleep, and of warm clothes, than to wield that
sword. As for that, said Sir Launcelot, come not too nigh; for, and
thou do, wit thou well I will slay thee. And when the knight of the
pavilion saw that, he start backward within the pavilion. And then the
dwarf armed him lightly, and so the knight thought by force and might
to take the sword from Sir Launcelot, and so he came stepping out, and
when Sir Launcelot saw him come so all armed with his sword in his
hand, then Sir Launcelot flew to him with such a might, and hit him
upon the helm such a buffet that the stroke troubled his brains, and
therewith the sword brake in three. And the knight fell to the earth as
he had been dead, the blood blasting out of his mouth, the nose, and
the ears. And then Sir Launcelot ran into the pavilion, and rushed even
into the warm bed: and there was a lady in that bed, and she gat her
smock, and ran out of the pavilion. And when she saw her lord lie on
the ground like to be dead, then she cried and wept as she had been
mad. Then with her noise the knight awaked out of his swoon, and looked
up weakly with his eyes, and then he asked her where was that mad man
that had given him such a buffet? for such a buffet had I never of
man's hand. Sir, said the dwarf, it is not worship to hurt him, for he
is a man out of his wit, and doubt ye not he hath been a man of great
worship, and for some heartly sorrow that he hath taken he is fallen
mad: and me seemeth, said the dwarf, he resembleth much unto Sir
Launcelot; for him I saw at the great tournament beside Lonazep. Jesu
defend, said that knight, that ever that noble knight Sir Launcelot
should be in such a plight. But whatsoever he be, said that knight,
harm will I none do him. And this knight's name was Bliant. Then he
said unto the dwarf. Go thou fast on horseback unto my brother Sir
Selivant, that is at the Castle Blank, and tell him of mine adventure,
and bid him bring with him an horse-litter, and then will we bear this
knight unto my castle.


CHAPTER II.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot was carried in a horse-litter, and how Sir Launcelot
rescued Sir Bliant his host._

So the dwarf rode fast, and he came again and brought Sir Selivant with
him, and six men with an horse-litter. And so they took up the
feather-bed with Sir Launcelot, and so carried all away with them unto
the Castle Blank, and he never awaked till he was within the castle.
And then they bound his hands and his feet, and gave him good meats and
good drinks, and brought him again to his strength and his fairness,
but in his wit they could not bring him again, nor to know himself.
Thus was Sir Launcelot there more than a year and an half, honestly
arrayed, and fair fared withal. Then upon a day this lord of that
castle, Sir Bliant, took his arms on horseback with a spear to seek
adventures. And as he rode in a forest there met him two knights
adventurous. The one was Breuse Sance Pité, and his brother, Sir
Bertelot, and these two ran both at once upon Sir Bliant, and brake
their spears upon his body. And then they drew out swords, and made
great battle, and fought long together. But at the last Sir Bliant was
sore wounded, and felt himself faint, and then he fled on horseback
toward his castle. And they came hurling under the castle where as Sir
Launcelot lay in a window, and saw how two knights laid upon Sir Bliant
with their swords. And when Sir Launcelot saw that, yet as wood as he
was, he was sorry for his lord Sir Bliant. And then Sir Launcelot brake
his chains from his legs and off his arms, and in the breaking he hurt
his hands sore: and so Sir Launcelot ran out at a postern, and there he
met with the two knights that chased Sir Bliant, and there he pulled
down Sir Bertelot with his bare hands from his horse, and therewithal
he wrothe his sword out of his hands, and so he lept unto Sir Breuse,
and gave him such a buffet upon the head that he tumbled backward over
his horse croup. And when Sir Bertelot saw there his brother have such
a fall, he gat a spear in his hand, and would have run Sir Launcelot
through. That saw Sir Bliant, and strake off the hand of Sir Bertelot:
and then Sir Breuse and Sir Bertelot gat their horses and fled away.
When Sir Selivant came, and saw what Sir Launcelot had done for his
brother, then he thanked God, and so did his brother, that ever they
did him any good. But when Sir Bliant saw that Sir Launcelot was hurt
with the breaking of his irons, then was he heavy that ever he bound
him. Bind him no more, said Sir Selivant, for he is happy and gracious.
Then they made great joy of Sir Launcelot, and they bound him no more.
And so he abode there an half year and more. And on the morn early, Sir
Launcelot was ware where came a great boar with many hounds nigh him.
But the boar was so big there might no hounds tear him, and the hunters
came after blowing their horns, both on horseback and on foot: and then
Sir Launcelot was ware where one alight, and tied his horse to a tree,
and leaned his spear against the tree.


CHAPTER III.
------------

_How Sir Launcelot fought against a boar and slew him, and how he was
hurt, and brought unto an hermitage._

So came Sir Launcelot, and found the horse bounden till a tree, and a
spear leaning against a tree, and a sword tied to the saddle bow. And
then Sir Launcelot lept into the saddle, and gat that spear in his
hand, and then he rode after the boar. And then Sir Launcelot was ware
where the boar set his back to a tree, fast by an hermitage. Then Sir
Launcelot ran at the boar with his spear. And therewith the boar turned
him nimbly, and rove out the lungs and the heart of the horse, so that
Launcelot fell to the earth, and or ever Sir Launcelot might get from
the horse, the boar rove him on the brawn of the thigh, up to the hough
bone. And then Sir Launcelot was wroth, and up he gat upon his feet,
and drew his sword, and he smote off the boar's head at one stroke. And
therewithal came out the hermit, and saw him have such a wound: then
the hermit came to Sir Launcelot and bemoaned him, and would have had
him home unto his hermitage. But when Sir Launcelot heard him speak, he
was so wroth with his wound that he ran upon the hermit to have slain
him, and the hermit ran away, and when Sir Launcelot might not overget
him he threw his sword after him, for Sir Launcelot might go no farther
for bleeding. Then the hermit turned again, and asked Sir Launcelot how
he was hurt. Fellow, said Sir Launcelot, this boar hath bitten me sore.
Then come with me, said the hermit, and I shall heal you. Go thy way,
said Sir Launcelot, and deal not with me. Then the hermit ran his way,
and there he met with a good knight with many men. Sir, said the
hermit, here is fast by my place the goodliest man that ever I saw, and
he is sore wounded with a boar, and yet he hath slain the boar. But
well I wot, said the hermit, and he be not holpen, that goodly man
shall die of that wound, and that were great pity. Then that knight, at
the desire of the hermit, gat a cart, and in that cart that knight put
the boar and Sir Launcelot, for Sir Launcelot was so feeble that they
might right easily deal with him. And so Sir Launcelot was brought unto
the hermitage, and there the hermit healed him of his wound. But the
hermit might not find Sir Launcelot's sustenance, and so he impaired
and waxed feeble, both of his body and of his wit, for the default of
his sustenance: he waxed more wooder than he was aforehand. And then,
upon a day. Sir Launcelot ran his way into the forest, and by adventure
he came to the city of Corbin where dame Elaine was, that bare Galahad,
Sir Launcelot's son. And so when he was entered into the town, he ran
through the town to the castle, and then all the young men of that city
ran after Sir Launcelot, and there they threw turves at him, and gave
him many sad strokes. And ever as Sir Launcelot might overreach any of
them he threw them, so that they would never come in his hands no more,
for of some he brake the legs and arms, and so fled into the castle,
and then came out knights and squires and rescued Sir Launcelot. And
when they beheld him, and looked upon his person, they thought they saw
never so goodly a man. And when they saw so many wounds upon him, all
they deemed that he had been a man of worship. And then they ordained
him clothes to his body, and straw underneath him, and a little house.
And then every day they would throw him meat, and set him drink, but
there was but few would bring meat to his hands.


CHAPTER IV.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot was known by dame Elaine, and was borne into a
chamber, and after healed by the Sangreal._

So it befel, that king Pelles had a nephew, his name was Castor, and so
he desired of the king to be made knight, and so at the request of this
Castor, the king made him knight at the feast of Candlemas. And when
Sir Castor was made knight, that same day he gave many gowns. And then
Sir Castor sent for the fool, that was Sir Launcelot. And when he was
come afore Sir Castor, he gave Sir Launcelot a robe of scarlet and all
that belonged unto him. And when Sir Launcelot was so arrayed like a
knight, he was the seemliest man in all the court, and none so well
made. So when he saw his time he went into the garden, and there Sir
Launcelot laid him down by a well and slept. And so at afternoon, dame
Elaine and her maidens came into the garden to play them, and as they
roamed up and down, one of dame Elaine's maidens espied where lay a
goodly man by the well sleeping, and anon shewed him to dame Elaine.
Peace, said dame Elaine, and say no word; and then she brought dame
Elaine where he lay. And when that she beheld him, anon she fell in
remembrance of him, and knew him verily for Sir Launcelot, and
therewithal she fell on weeping so heartily that she sank even to the
earth. And when she had thus wept a great while, then she arose and
called her maidens, and said she was sick. And so she went out of the
garden, and she went straight to her father, and there she took him
apart by herself, and then she said, Oh father, now have I need of your
help, and but if that ye help me, farewell my good days for ever. What
is that, daughter? said king Pelles. Sir, she said, thus is it: in your
garden I went for to sport, and there by the well I found Sir Launcelot
du Lake sleeping. I may not believe that, said king Pelles. Sir, she
said, truly he is there, and me seemeth he should be distract out of
his wit. Then hold you still, said the king, and let me deal. Then the
king called to him such as he most trusted, a four persons, and dame
Elaine his daughter. And when they came to the well and beheld Sir
Launcelot, anon dame Brisen knew him. Sir, said dame Brisen, we must be
wise how we deal with him, for this knight is out of his mind, and if
we awake him rudely, what he will do we all know not. But ye shall
abide, and I shall throw such an enchantment upon him that he shall not
awake within the space of an hour; and so she did. Then within a little
while after king Pelles commanded that all people should avoid, that
none should be in that way there as the king would come. And so when
this was done, these four men and these ladies laid hand on Sir
Launcelot. And so they bare him into a tower, and so into a chamber
where was the holy vessel of the Sancgreal, and by force Sir Launcelot
was laid by that holy vessel, and there came a holy man and uncovered
that vessel, and so by miracle, and by virtue of that holy vessel, Sir
Launcelot was healed and recovered. And when that he was awaked he
groaned and sighed, and complained greatly that he was passing sore.


CHAPTER V.
----------

_How Sir Launcelot, after that he was whole and had his mind, he was
ashamed, and how that Elaine desired a castle for him._

And when Sir Launcelot saw king Pelles and Elaine he waxed ashamed, and
said thus: Oh Lord Jesu, how came I here? For God's sake, my lord, let
me wit how I came here? Sir, said dame Elaine, into this country ye
came like a mad man clean out of your wit. And here have ye been kept
as a fool, and no creature here knew what ye were, until by fortune a
maiden of mine brought me unto you, where as ye lay sleeping by a well,
and anon, as I verily beheld you, I knew you. And then I told my
father, and so were ye brought afore this holy vessel, and by the
virtue of it thus were ye healed. O, said Sir Launcelot, if this be
sooth, how many there be that know of my woodness. Truly, said Elaine,
no more but my father and I and dame Brisen. Now, I pray you, said Sir
Launcelot, keep it in counsel, and let no man know it in the world, for
I am sore ashamed that I have been thus miscarried, for I am banished
out of the country of Logris for ever, that is for to say, the country
of England. And so Sir Launcelot lay more than a fortnight, or ever
that he might stir for soreness. And then upon a day he said unto dame
Elaine these words: Lady Elaine, for your sake I have had much travel,
care, and anguish, it needeth not to rehearse it, ye know how.
Notwithstanding I know well I have done foul to you, when that I drew
my sword to you, for to have slain you. And all was the cause that ye
and dame Brisen deceived me. That is truth, said dame Elaine. Now will
ye for my love, said Sir Launcelot, go unto your father, and get me a
place of him wherein I may dwell: for in the court of king Arthur may I
never come. Sir, said dame Elaine, I will live and die with you, and
only for your sake, and if my life might not avail you, and my death
might avail you, wit ye well I would die for your sake. And I will go
to my father, and I am sure there is nothing that I can desire of him
but I shall have it. And where ye be, my lord Sir Launcelot, doubt ye
not but I will be with you with all the service that I may do. So
forthwithal she went to her father, and said, Sir, my lord Sir
Launcelot desireth to be here by you in some castle of yours. Well,
daughter, said the king, sith it is his desire to abide in these
marches, he shall be in the castle of Bliant, and there shall ye be
with him, and twenty of the fairest ladies that be in this country, and
they shall all be of the great blood; and ye shall have ten knights
with you. For, daughter, I will that ye wit we all be honoured by the
blood of Sir Launcelot.


CHAPTER VI.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot came into the Joyous Isle, and there he named
himself Le Chevaler Mal Fet._

Then went dame Elaine unto Sir Launcelot, and told him all how her
father had devised for him and her. Then came the knight Sir Castor,
that was nephew unto king Pelles, unto Sir Launcelot, and asked him
what was his name? Sir, said Sir Launcelot, my name is Le Chevaler Mal
Fet, that is to say, the knight that hath trespassed. Sir, said Sir
Castor, it may well be so, but ever me seemeth your name should be Sir
Launcelot du Lake, for or now I have seen you. Sir, said Launcelot, ye
are not as a gentle knight: I put case my name were Sir Launcelot, and
that it list me not to discover my name; what should it grieve you here
to keep my counsel, and ye not hurt thereby? But wit thou well, and
ever it lie in my power I shall grieve you, and that I promise you
truly. Then Sir Castor kneeled down and besought Sir Launcelot of
mercy:--For I shall never utter what ye be while that ye be in these
parts. Then Sir Launcelot pardoned him. And then after this king Pelles
with ten knights, and dame Elaine and twenty ladies, rode unto the
castle of Bliant, that stood in an island enclosed in iron, with a fair
water, deep and large. And when they were there Sir Launcelot let call
it the Joyous Isle, and there was he called none otherwise but Le
Chevaler Mal Fet, the knight that hath trespassed. Then Sir Launcelot
let make him a shield all of sable, and a queen crowned in the midst
all of silver, and a knight, clean armed, kneeling before her; and
every day once, for any mirths that all the ladies might make him, he
would once every day look towards the realm of Logris where king Arthur
and queen Guenever were. And then would he fall upon a weeping as
though his heart should to-brast. So it fell that time that Sir
Launcelot heard of a justing fast by his castle, within three leagues.
Then he called unto him a dwarf, and he bade him go unto that justing,
and, or ever the knights depart, look thou make there a cry in the
hearing of all the knights, that there is one knight in the Joyous
Isle, that is the castle Bliant, and say that his name is Le Chevaler
Mal Fet, that will just against knights that will come; and who that
putteth that knight to the worse shall have a fair maid and a jerfalcon.


CHAPTER VII.
------------

_Of a great tourneying in the Joyous Isle, and how Sir Percivale and
Sir Ector came thither, and Sir Percivale fought with him._

So when this cry was made, unto Joyous Isle drew knights to the number
of five hundred. And wit ye well there was never seen in Arthur's days
one knight that did so much deeds of arms as Sir Launcelot did three
days together. For, as the book maketh truly mention, he had the better
of all the five hundred knights, and there was not one slain of them.
And after that Sir Launcelot made them all a great feast. And in the
meanwhile came Sir Percivale de Galis and Sir Ector de Maris under that
castle that was called the Joyous Isle. And as they beheld that gay
castle they would have gone to that castle, but they might not for the
broad water, and bridge could they find none. Then they saw on the
other side a lady with a sperhawk in her hand, and Sir Percivale called
unto her, and asked that lady who was in that castle. Fair knight, she
said, here within this castle is the fairest lady in this land, and her
name is Elaine. Also we have in this castle the fairest knight and the
mightiest man that is, I dare say, living, and he calleth himself Le
Chevaler Mal Fet. How came he into these marches? said Sir Percivale.
Truly, said the damsel, he came into this country like a mad man, with
dogs and boys chasing him through the city of Corbin; and by the holy
vessel of the Sancgreal he was brought into his wit again, but he will
not do battle with no knight but by undorne or by noon. And if ye list
to come into the castle, said the lady, ye must ride unto the further
side of the castle, and there shall ye find a vessel that will bear you
and your horse. Then they departed and came unto the vessel. And then
Sir Percivale alight, and said to Sir Ector de Maris, Ye shall abide me
here until that I wit what manner a knight he is. For it were shame
unto us, inasmuch as he is but one knight, and we should both do battle
with him. Do ye as ye list, said Sir Ector de Maris, and here I shall
abide you until that I hear of you. Then passed Sir Percivale the
water. And when he came to the castle-gate, he bad the porter, Go thou
to the good knight within the castle, and tell him here is come an
errant knight to just with him. Sir, said the porter, ride ye within
the castle, and there is a common place for justing, that lords and
ladies may behold you. So anon as Sir Launcelot had warning, he was
soon ready; and there Sir Percivale and Sir Launcelot encountered with
such a might, and their spears were so rude, that both the horses and
the knights fell to the earth. Then they avoided their horses and flang
out noble swords, and hewed away cantels of their shields, and hurtled
together with their shields like two boars, and either wounded other
passing sore. At the last Sir Percivale spake first, when they had
foughten there more than two hours. Fair knight, said Sir Percivale, I
require thee tell me thy name, for I met never with such a knight. Sir,
said Sir Launcelot, my name is Le Chevaler Mal Fet: now tell me your
name, said Sir Launcelot, I require you gentle knight. Truly, said Sir
Percivale, my name is Sir Percivale de Galis, that was brother unto the
good knight Sir Lamorak de Galis, and king Pellinore was our father,
and Sir Aglovale is my brother. Alas, said Sir Launcelot, what have I
done to fight with you that art a knight of the Table Round, that
sometime was your fellow!


CHAPTER VIII.
-------------

_How each of them knew other, and of their great courtesy. And how his
brother Sir Ector came unto him, and of their joy._

And therewithal Sir Launcelot kneeled down upon his knees, and threw
away his shield and his sword from him. When Sir Percivale saw him do
so, he marvelled what he meaned. And then thus he said, Sir knight,
whatsoever thou be, I require thee upon the high order of knighthood
tell me thy true name. Then he said, Truly my name is Sir Launcelot du
Lake, king Ban's son of Benoy. Alas, said Sir Percivale, what have I
done! I was sent by the queen for to seek you, and so I have sought you
nigh this two year; and yonder is Sir Ector de Maris your brother
abideth me on the other side of the yonder water. Now, said Sir
Percivale, I pray you forgive me mine offence that I have here done. It
is soon forgiven, said Sir Launcelot. Then Sir Percivale sent for Sir
Ector de Maris. And when Sir Launcelot had a sight of him, he ran unto
him and took him in his arms, and then Sir Ector kneeled down and
either wept upon other, that all had pity to behold them. Then came
dame Elaine, and she there made them great cheer as might lie in her
power; and there she told Sir Ector and Sir Percivale how and in what
manner Sir Launcelot came into that country, and how he was healed. And
there it was known how long Sir Launcelot was with Sir Bliant and with
Sir Selivant, and how he first met with them, and how he departed from
them because of a boar; and how the hermit healed Sir Launcelot of his
great wound, and how that he came to Corbin.


CHAPTER IX.
-----------

_How Sir Bors and Sir Lionel came to king Brandegore, and how Sir Bors
took his son Helin le Blank, and of Sir Launcelot._

Now leave we Sir Launcelot in the Joyous Isle with the lady dame
Elaine, and Sir Percivale and Sir Ector playing with them, and turn we
to Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Lionel, that had sought Sir Launcelot nigh
by the space of two years, and never could they hear of him. And as
they thus rode by adventure, they came to the house of Brandegore, and
there Sir Bors was well known, for he had a child of the king's
daughter fifteen years before, and his name was Helin le Blank. And
when Sir Bors saw that child it liked him passing well. And so those
knights had good cheer of the king Brandegore. And on the morn Sir Bors
came afore king Brandegore, and said, Here is my son Helin le Blank,
that as it is said he is my son; and since it is so, I will that ye wit
I will have him with me unto the court of king Arthur. Sir, said the
king, ye may well take him with you, but he is over tender of age. As
for that, said Sir Bors, I will have him with me, and bring him to the
house of most worship of the world. So when Sir Bors should depart,
there was made great sorrow for the departing of Helin le Blank, and
great weeping was there made. But Sir Bors and Sir Lionel departed. And
within a while they came to Camelot, where was king Arthur. And when
king Arthur understood that Helin le Blank was Sir Bors' son, and
nephew unto king Brandegore, then king Arthur let him make knight of
the Round Table; and so he proved a good knight and an adventurous.

Now will we turn to our matter of Sir Launcelot. It befel upon a day
Sir Ector and Sir Percivale came to Sir Launcelot and asked him what he
would do, and whether he would go with them unto king Arthur or not?
Nay, said Sir Launcelot, that may not be by no mean; for I was so
entreated at the court that I cast me never to come there more. Sir,
said Sir Ector, I am your brother, and ye are the man in the world that
I love most, and if I understood that it were your disworship, ye may
understand I would never counsel you thereto; but king Arthur and all
his knights, and in especial queen Guenever, made such dole and sorrow
that it was marvel to hear and see. And ye must remember the great
worship and renown that ye be of, how that ye have been more spoken of
than any other knight that is now living; for there is none that
beareth the name now but ye and Sir Tristram; therefore, brother, said
Sir Ector, make you ready to ride to the court with us, and I dare say
there was never knight better welcome to the court than ye: and I wot
well, and can make it good, said Sir Ector, it hath cost my lady the
queen twenty thousand pound the seeking of you. Well, brother, said Sir
Launcelot, I will do after your counsel, and ride with you. So then
they took their horses, and made them ready, and took their leave at
king Pelles and at dame Elaine. And when Sir Launcelot should depart,
dame Elaine made great sorrow. My lord Sir Launcelot, said dame Elaine,
at this same feast of Pentecost shall your son and mine, Galahad, be
made knight, for he is fully now fifteen winter old. Do as ye list,
said Sir Launcelot, God give him grace to prove a good knight. As for
that, said dame Elaine, I doubt not he shall prove the best man of his
kin, except one. Then shall he be a man good enough, said Sir Launcelot.


CHAPTER X.
----------

_How Sir Launcelot with Sir Percivale and Sir Ector came to the court,
and of the great joy of him._

Then they departed, and within five days' journey they came to Camelot,
that is called in English, Winchester. And when Sir Launcelot was come
among them, the king and all the knights made great joy of him. And
there Sir Percivale de Galis and Sir Ector de Maris began and told the
whole adventures, that Sir Launcelot had been out of his mind the time
of his absence, how he called himself Le Chevaler Mal Fet, the knight
that had trespassed, and in three days Sir Launcelot smote down five
hundred knights. And ever, as Sir Ector and Sir Percivale told these
tales of Sir Launcelot, queen Guenever wept as she should have died.
Then the queen made great cheer. Truly, said king Arthur, I marvel for
what cause ye Sir Launcelot went out of your mind? I and many others
deem it was for the love of fair Elaine, the daughter of king Pelles,
by whom ye are noised that ye have a child, and his name is Galahad;
and men say he shall do marvels. My lord, said Sir Launcelot, if I did
any folly, I have that I sought. And therewithal the king spake no
more; but all Sir Launcelot's kin knew for whom he went out of his
mind. And then there were great feasts made and great joy. And many
great lords and ladies, when they heard that Sir Launcelot was come to
the court again, they made great joy.


CHAPTER XI.
-----------

_How La Beale Isoud counselled Sir Tristram to go unto the court to the
great feast of Pentecost._

Now will we leave of this matter, and speak we of Sir Tristram and of
Sir Palamides, that was the Saracen unchristened. When Sir Tristram was
come home unto Joyous Gard from his adventures, all this while that Sir
Launcelot was thus missed two year and more, Sir Tristram bare the
renown through all the realm of Logris, and many strange adventures
befel him, and full well and manly and worshipfully he brought them to
an end. So when he was come home, La Beale Isoud told him of the great
feast that should be at Pentecost next following; and there she told
him how Sir Launcelot had been missed two years, and all that while he
had been out of his mind, and how he was holpen by the holy vessel the
Sancgreal. Alas, said Sir Tristram, that caused some debate betwixt him
and queen Guenever. Sir, said dame Isoud, I know it all, for queen
Guenever sent me a letter, in the which she wrote me all how it was,
for to require you to seek him; and now, blessed be God, said La Beale
Isoud, he is whole and sound, and come again to the court. Thereof am I
glad, said Sir Tristram, and now shall ye and I make us ready, for both
ye and I will be at the feast. Sir, said Isoud, and it please you I
will not be there, for through me ye be marked of many good knights,
and that causeth you to have much more labour for my sake than needeth
you. Then will I not be there, said Sir Tristram, but if ye be there.
Not so, said La Beale Isoud, for then shall I be spoken of shame among
all queens and ladies of estate, for ye that are called one of the
noblest knights of the world, and ye a knight of the Round Table, how
may ye be missed at that feast? What shall be said among all
knights?--See how Sir Tristram hunteth, and hawketh, and cowereth
within a castle with his lady, and forsaketh your worship. Alas, shall
some say, it is pity that ever he was made knight, or that ever he
should have the love of a lady. Also what shall queens and ladies say
of me?--It is pity that I have my life, that I will hold so noble a
knight as ye are from his worship. Truly, said Sir Tristram unto La
Beale Isoud, it is passing well said of you, and nobly counselled, and
now I well understand that ye love me; and like as ye have counselled
me, I will do a part thereafter. But there shall no man nor child ride
with me, but myself. And so will I ride on Tuesday next coming, and no
more harness of war but my spear and my sword.


CHAPTER XII.
------------

_How Sir Tristram departed unarmed, and met with Sir Palamides, and how
they smote each other, and how Sir Palamides forbare him._

And so when the day came, Sir Tristram took his leave at La Beale
Isoud; and she sent with him four knights, and within half a mile he
sent them again: and within a mile after Sir Tristram saw afore him
where Sir Palamides had stricken down a knight, and almost wounded him
to the death. Then Sir Tristram repented him that he was not armed, and
then he hoved still. With that Sir Palamides knew Sir Tristram, and
cried on high, Sir Tristram, now be we met, for or we depart we will
redress our old sores! As for that, said Sir Tristram, there was never
yet Christian man that might make his boast that ever I fled from him;
and wit ye well Sir Palamides, thou that art a Saracen shall never make
thy boast that Sir Tristram de Liones shall flee from thee. And
therewith Sir Tristram made his horse to run, and with all his might he
came straight upon Sir Palamides, and brast his spear upon him in an
hundred pieces. And forthwithal Sir Tristram drew his sword. And then
he turned his horse and struck at Palamides six great strokes upon his
helm, and then Sir Palamides stood still and beheld Sir Tristram, and
marvelled of his woodness and of his folly. And then Sir Palamides said
to himself, And Sir Tristram were armed it were hard to cease him of
this battle, and if I turn again and slay him I am shamed wheresoever
that I go. Then Sir Tristram spake, and said, Thou coward knight, what
castest thou to do? why wilt thou not do battle with me, for have thou
no doubt I shall endure all thy malice. Ah, Sir Tristram, said Sir
Palamides, full well thou wotest I may not fight with thee for shame,
for thou art here naked, and I am armed, and if I slay thee dishonour
shall be mine. And well thou wotest, said Sir Palamides to Sir
Tristram, I know thy strength and thy hardiness to endure against a
good knight. That is truth, said Sir Tristram, I understand thy
valiantness well. Ye say well, said Sir Palamides, now I require you
tell me a question that I shall say to you. Tell me what it is, said
Sir Tristram, and I shall answer you the truth. I put the case, said
Sir Palamides, that ye were armed at all rights as well as I am, and I
naked as ye be, what would ye do to me now by your true knighthood? Ah,
said Sir Tristram, now I understand thee well, Sir Palamides, for now
must I say my own judgment, and, as God me bless, that I shall say
shall not be said for no fear that I have of thee. But this is all;
wit, Sir Palamides, as at this time thou shouldest depart from me, for
I would not have ado with thee. No more will I, said Sir Palamides, and
therefore ride forth on thy way. As for that I may choose, said Sir
Tristram, either to ride or to abide. But Sir Palamides, said Sir
Tristram, I marvel of one thing, that thou that art so good a knight,
that thou wilt not be christened, and thy brother Sir Safere hath been
christened many a day.


CHAPTER XIII.
-------------

_How that Sir Tristram gat him harness of a knight which was hurt, and
how he overthrew Sir Palamides._

As for that, said Sir Palamides, I may not yet be christened, for one
avow that I have made many years agone; howbeit in my heart I believe
in Jesus Christ and his mild mother Mary; but I have but one battle to
do, and when that is done I will be baptised with a good will. By my
head, said Sir Tristram, as for one battle thou shalt not seek it no
longer. For God defend, said Sir Tristram, that through my default thou
shouldest longer live thus a Saracen. For yonder is a knight that ye,
Sir Palamides, have hurt and smitten down; now help me that I were
armed in his armour, and I shall soon fulfil thine avows. As ye will,
said Sir Palamides, so it shall be. So they rode unto that knight that
sat upon a bank, and then Sir Tristram saluted him, and he weakly
saluted him again. Sir knight, said Sir Tristram, I require you tell me
your right name. Sir, he said, my name is Sir Galleron of Galway, and
knight of the Table Round. Truly, said Sir Tristram, I am right heavy
of your hurts: but this is all, I must pray you to lend me all your
whole armour, for ye see I am unarmed, and I must do battle with this
knight. Sir, said the hurt knight, ye shall have it with a good will;
but ye must beware, for I warn you that knight is wight. Sir, said
Galleron, I pray you tell me your name, and what is that knight's name
that hath beaten me. Sir, as for my name, it is Sir Tristram de Liones,
and as for the knight's name that hath hurt you, it is Sir Palamides,
brother unto the good knight Sir Safere, and yet is Sir Palamides
unchristened. Alas, said Sir Galleron, that is pity that so good a
knight and so noble a man of arms should be unchristened. Truly, said
Sir Tristram, either he shall slay me, or I him, but that he shall be
christened or ever we depart in sunder. My lord Sir Tristram, said Sir
Galleron, your renown and worship is well known through many realms,
and God save you this day from shenship and shame. Then Sir Tristram
unarmed Galleron, the which was a noble knight and had done many deeds
of arms, and he was a large knight of flesh and bone. And when he was
unarmed he stood upon his feet, for he was bruised in the back with a
spear; yet, so as Sir Galleron might, he armed Sir Tristram. And then
Sir Tristram mounted upon his own horse, and in his hand he gat Sir
Galleron's spear. And therewithal Sir Palamides was ready, and so they
came hurtling together, and either smote other in the midst of their
shields, and therewithal Sir Palamides' spear brake, and Sir Tristram
smote down the horse; and then Sir Palamides, as soon as he might,
avoided his horse, and dressed his shield, and pulled out his sword.
That saw Sir Tristram, and therewith he alight, and tied his horse to a
tree.


CHAPTER XIV.
------------

_How Sir Tristram and Sir Palamides fought long together, and after
accorded; and how Sir Tristram made him to be christened._

And then they came together as two wild boars, lashing together,
tracing and traversing as noble men that oft had been well proved in
battle; but ever Sir Palamides dread the might of Sir Tristram, and
therefore he suffered him to breathe him. Thus they fought more than
two hours; and often Sir Tristram smote such strokes at Sir Palamides
that he made him to kneel; and Sir Palamides brake and cut away many
pieces of Sir Tristram's shield, and then Sir Palamides wounded Sir
Tristram, for he was a well fighting man. Then Sir Tristram was wood
wrath out of measure, and rashed upon Sir Palamides with such a might
that Sir Palamides fell groveling to the earth, and therewithal he
leapt up lightly upon his feet, and then Sir Tristram wounded Sir
Palamides sore through the shoulder. And ever Sir Tristram fought still
in like hard, and Sir Palamides failed not, but gave him many sad
strokes. And at the last Sir Tristram doubled his strokes, and by
fortune Sir Tristram smote Sir Palamides' sword out of his hand, and if
Sir Palamides had stooped for his sword, he had been slain. Then
Palamides stood still and beheld his sword with a sorrowful heart. How
now, said Sir Tristram unto Palamides, now have I thee at advantage as
thou hadst me this day, but it shall never be said in no court, nor
among good knights, that Sir Tristram shall slay any knight that is
weaponless, and therefore take thou thy sword, and let us make an end
of this battle. As for to do this battle, said Palamides, I dare right
well end it; but I have no great lust to fight no more, and for this
cause, said Palamides, mine offence to you is not so great but that we
may be friends. All that I have offended is and was for the love of La
Beale Isoud. And as for her, I dare say she is peerless above all other
ladies, and also I proffered her never no dishonour; and by her I have
gotten the most part of my worship, and sithen I offended never as to
her own person. And as for the offence that I have done, it was against
your own person, and for that offence ye have given me this day many
sad strokes, and some I have given you again; and now I dare say I felt
never man of your might, nor so well breathed, but if it were Sir
Launcelot du Lake. Wherefore I require you, my lord, forgive me all
that I have offended unto you. And this same day have me to the next
church, and first let me be clean confessed, and after see you now that
I be truly baptized. And then will we all ride together unto the court
of Arthur, that we be there at the high feast. Now take your horse,
said Sir Tristram, and as ye say, so it shall be; and all your evil
will God forgive it you, and I do. And here, within this mile, is the
suffragan of Carlisle, that shall give you the sacrament of baptism.
Then they took their horses, and Sir Galleron rode with them. And when
they came to the suffragan Sir Tristram told him their desire. Then the
suffragan let fill a great vessel with water. And when he had hallowed
it, he then confessed clean Sir Palamides, and Sir Tristram and Sir
Galleron were his godfathers. And then soon after they departed, riding
towards Camelot, where king Arthur and queen Guenever was, and for the
most part all the knights of the Round Table. And so the king and all
the court were glad that Sir Palamides was christened. And at the same
feast in came Galahad and sat in the Siege Perilous.

And so therewithal departed and dissevered all the knights of the Round
Table. And Sir Tristram returned again unto Joyous Gard, and Sir
Palamides followed the questing beast.


End of the Twelvth Book.
========================
