The Thirteenth Book.
====================

CHAPTER I.
----------

_How at the Vigil of the feast of Pentecost entered into the hall,
before king Arthur, a damsel, and desired Sir Launcelot for to come
and dub a knight, and how he went with her._

At the vigil of Pentecost, when all the fellowship of the Round Table
were comen unto Camelot, and there heard their service, and the tables
were set ready to the meat, right so entered into the hall a full fair
gentlewoman on horseback, that had ridden full fast, for her horse was
all besweat. Then she there alight, and came before the king, and
saluted him; and then he said, Damsel, God thee bless! Sir, said she, I
pray you say me where Sir Launcelot is? Yonder ye may see him, said the
king. Then she went unto Launcelot and said, Sir Launcelot, I salute
you on king Pelles' behalf, and I require you come on with me hereby
into a forest. Then Sir Launcelot asked her with whom she dwelled? I
dwell, said she, with king Pelles. What will ye with me? said Sir
Launcelot. Ye shall know, said she, when ye come thither. Well, said
he, I will gladly go with you. So Sir Launcelot bade his squire saddle
his horse and bring his arms; and in all haste he did his commandment.
Then came the queen unto Launcelot and said, Will ye leave us at this
high feast? Madam, said the gentlewoman, wit ye well he shall be with
you to-morrow by dinner-time. If I wist, said the queen, that he should
not be with us here to-morn, he should not go with you by my good will.

Right so departed Sir Launcelot with the gentlewoman, and rode until
that he came into a forest, and into a great valley, where they saw an
abbey of nuns; and there was a squire ready, and opened the gates; and
so they entered, and descended off their horses, and there came a fair
fellowship about Sir Launcelot and welcomed him, and were passing glad
of his coming. And then they led him into the Abbess's chamber, and
unarmed him, and right so he was ware upon a bed lying two of his
cousins, Sir Bors and Sir Lionel, and then he waked them, and when they
saw him they made great joy. Sir, said Sir Bors unto Sir Launcelot,
what adventure hath brought thee hither, for we wend to-morrow to have
found you at Camelot? Truly, said Sir Launcelot, a gentlewoman brought
me hither, but I know not the cause. In the meanwhile, as they thus
stood talking together, there came twelve nuns which brought with them
Galahad, the which was passing fair and well made, that unneth in the
world men might not find his match; and all those ladies wept. Sir,
said the ladies, we bring you here this child, the which we have
nourished, and we pray you to make him a knight; for of a more worthier
man's hand may he not receive the order of knighthood. Sir Launcelot
beheld that young squire, and saw him seemly and demure as a dove, with
all manner of good features, that he wend of his age never to have seen
so fair a man of form. Then said Sir Launcelot, Cometh this desire of
himself? He and all they said, Yea. Then shall he, said Sir Launcelot,
receive the high order of knighthood as to-morrow at the reverence of
the high feast. That night Sir Launcelot had passing good cheer, and on
the morn at the hour of prime, at Galahad's desire, he made him knight,
and said, God make him a good man, For beauty faileth you not as any
that liveth.


CHAPTER II.
-----------

_How the letters were found written in the siege perilous, and of the
marvellous adventure of the sword in a stone._

Now, fair sir, said Sir Launcelot, will ye come with me unto the court
of king Arthur? Nay, said he, I will not go with you as at this time.
Then he departed from them and took his two cousins with him, and so
they came unto Camelot by the hour of undorne on Whitsunday. By that
time the king and the queen were gone to the minster to hear their
service: then the king and the queen were passing glad of Sir Bors and
Sir Lionel, and so was all the fellowship. So when the king and all the
knights were come from service, the barons espied in the sieges of the
Round Table, all about written with gold letters. Here ought to sit he,
and he ought to sit here. And thus they went so long until that they
came to the siege perilous, where they found letters newly written of
gold, that said: Four hundred winters and fifty-four accomplished after
the passion of our Lord Jesu Christ ought this siege to be fulfilled.
Then all they said, This is a marvellous thing, and an adventurous. In
the name of God, said Sir Launcelot; and then he accounted the term of
the writing, from the birth of our Lord unto that day. It seemeth me,
said Sir Launcelot, this siege ought to be fulfilled this same day, for
this is the Feast of Pentecost after the four hundred and four and
fifty year; and if it would please all parties, I would none of these
letters were seen this day, till he be come that ought to achieve this
adventure. Then made they to ordain a cloth of silk for to cover these
letters in the siege perilous. Then the king bad haste unto dinner.
Sir, said Sir Kay the steward, if ye go now unto your meat, ye shall
break your old custom of your court. For ye have not used on this day
to sit at your meat or that ye have seen some adventure. Ye say sooth,
said the king, but I had so great joy of Sir Launcelot and of his
cousins, which be come to the court whole and sound, that I bethought
me not of my old custom. So as they stood speaking, in came a squire,
and said unto the king, Sir, I bring unto you marvellous tidings. What
be they? said the king. Sir, there is here beneath at the river a great
stone, which I saw fleet above the water, and therein saw I sticking a
sword. The king said, I will see that marvel. So all the knights went
with him, and when they came unto the river, they found there a stone
fleeting, as it were of red marble, and therein stack a fair and a rich
sword, and in the pomell thereof were precious stones, wrought with
subtil letters of gold. Then the barons read the letters, which said in
this wise: Never shall man take me hence but only he by whose side I
ought to hang, and he shall be the best knight of the world. When the
king had seen these letters, he said unto Sir Launcelot, Fair sir, this
sword ought to be yours, for I am sure ye be the best knight of the
world. Then Sir Launcelot answered full soberly: Certes, sir, it is not
my sword: also, sir, wit ye well I have no hardiness to set my hand to,
for it longed not to hang by my side. Also who that assayeth to take
that sword, and faileth of it, he shall receive a wound by that sword,
that he shall not be whole long after. And I will that ye wit that this
same day will the adventures of the Sancgreal, that is called the holy
vessel, begin.


CHAPTER III.
------------

_How Sir Gawaine assayed to draw out the sword, and how an old man
brought in Galahad._

Now, fair nephew, said the king unto Sir Gawaine, assay ye for my love.
Sir, he said, save your good grace, I shall not do that. Sir, said the
king, assay to take the sword, and at my commandment. Sir, said
Gawaine, your commandment I will obey. And therewith he took up the
sword by the handles, but he might not stir it. I thank you, said the
king to Sir Gawaine. My lord Sir Gawaine, said Sir Launcelot, now wit
ye well, this sword shall touch you so sore that ye shall will ye had
never set your hand thereto, for the best castle of this realm. Sir, he
said, I might not withsay mine uncle's will and commandment. But when
the king heard this, he repented it much, and said unto Sir Percivale
that he should assay for his love. And he said, Gladly, for to bear Sir
Gawaine fellowship. And therewith he set his hand on the sword, and
drew it strongly, but he might not move it. Then were there more that
durst be so hardy to set their hands thereto. Now may ye go to your
dinner, said Sir Kay unto the king, for a marvellous adventure have ye
seen. So the king and all went unto the court, and every knight knew
his own place, and set him therein, and young men that were knights
served them. So when they were served, and all sieges fulfilled, save
only the siege perilous, anon there befell a marvellous adventure, that
all the doors and the windows of the place shut by themself. Not for
then the hall was not greatly darkened, and therewith they abashed both
one and other. Then king Arthur spake first, and said, Fair fellows and
lords, we have seen this day marvels, but or night I suppose we shall
see greater marvels. In the mean while came in a good old man, and an
ancient, clothed all in white, and there was no knight knew from whence
he came. And with him he brought a young knight, both on foot, in red
arms, without sword or shield, save a scabbard hanging by his side. And
these words he said, Peace be with you, fair lords. Then the old man
said unto Arthur, Sir, I bring here a young knight the which is of
king's lineage, and of the kindred of Joseph of Arimathie, whereby the
marvels of this court and of strange realms shall be fully accomplished.


CHAPTER IV.
-----------

_How the old man brought Galahad to the siege perilous and set him
therein, and how all the knights marvelled._

The king was right glad of his words, and said unto the good man, Sir,
ye be right welcome, and the young knight with you. Then the old man
made the young man to unarm him; and he was in a coat of red sendel,
and bare a mantle upon his shoulder that was furred with ermine, and
put that upon him. And the old knight said unto the young knight, Sir,
follow me. And anon he led him unto the siege perilous, where beside
sat Sir Launcelot, and the good man lift up the cloth, and found there
letters that said thus: This is the siege of Galahad the haut prince.
Sir, said the old knight, wit ye well that place is yours. And then he
set him down surely in that siege. And then he said to the old man,
Sir, ye may now go your way, for well have ye done that ye were
commanded to do. And recommend me unto my grandsire king Pelles, and
unto my lord Petchere, and say them on my behalf, I shall come and see
them as soon as ever I may. So the good man departed, and there met him
twenty noble squires, and so took their horses and went their way. Then
all the knights of the Table Round marvelled them greatly of Sir
Galahad, that he durst sit there in that siege perilous, and was so
tender of age, and wist not from whence he came, but all only by God,
and said, This is he by whom the Sancgreal shall be achieved, for there
sat never none but he, but he were mischieved. Then Sir Launcelot
beheld his son, and had great joy of him. Then Sir Bors told his
fellows, Upon pain of my life this young knight shall come unto great
worship. This noise was great in all the court, so that it came to the
queen. Then she had marvel what knight it might be that durst adventure
him to sit in the siege perilous. Many said unto the queen, he
resembled much unto Sir Launcelot. I may well suppose, said the queen,
that he is son of Sir Launcelot and king Pelles' daughter, and his name
is Galahad. I would fain see him, said the queen, for he must needs be
a noble man, for so is his father; I report me unto all the Table
Round. So when the meat was done, that the king and all were risen, the
king went unto the siege perilous, and lift up the cloth, and found
there the name of Galahad, and then he shewed it unto Sir Gawaine, and
said, Fair nephew, now have we among us Sir Galahad the good knight,
that shall worship us all, and upon pain of my life he shall achieve
the Sancgreal, right so as Sir Launcelot hath done us to understand.
Then came king Arthur unto Galahad, and said, Sir, ye be welcome, for
ye shall move many good knights to the quest of the Sancgreal, and ye
shall achieve that never knights might bring to an end. Then the king
took him by the hand, and went down from the palace to shew Galahad the
adventures of the stone.


CHAPTER V.
----------

_How king Arthur shewed the stone, hoving on the water, to Galahad, and
how he drew out the sword._

The queen heard thereof, and came after with many ladies, and shewed
them the stone where it hoved on the water. Sir, said the king unto Sir
Galahad, here is a great marvel as ever I saw, and right good knights
have assayed and failed. Sir, said Galahad, that is no marvel, for this
adventure is not theirs, but mine, and for the surety of this sword I
brought none with me; for here by my side hangeth the scabbard. And
anon he laid his hand on the sword, and lightly drew it out of the
stone, and put it in the sheath and said unto the king, Now it goeth
better than it did aforehand. Sir, said the king, a shield God shall
send you. Now have I, said Sir Galahad, that sword that sometime was
the good knight's Balin le Savage, and he was a passing good man of his
hands. And with this sword he slew his brother Balan, and that was
great pity, for he was a good knight, and either slew other through a
dolorous stroke that Balan gave unto my grandfather king Pelles, the
which is not yet whole, nor not shall be till I heal him. Therewith the
king and all espied where came riding down the river a lady on a white
palfrey toward them. Then she saluted the king and the queen, and asked
if that Sir Launcelot was there? And then he answered himself, I am
here, fair lady. Then she said, all with weeping, How your great doing
is changed sith this day in the morn. Damsel, why say ye so? said
Launcelot. I say you sooth, said the damsel, for ye were this day the
best knight of the world, but who should say so now should be a liar,
for there is now one better than ye. And well it is proved by the
adventures of the sword whereto ye durst not set your hand, and that is
the change and leaving of your name; wherefore I make unto you a
remembrance, that ye shall not ween from henceforth that ye be the best
knight of the world. As touching unto that, said Launcelot, I know well
I was never the best. Yes, said the damsel, that were ye, and are yet
of any sinful man of the world. And sir king, Nacien the hermit sendeth
thee word, that thee shall befall the greatest worship that ever befell
king in Britain; and I say you wherefore, for this day the Sancgreal
shall appear in thy house, and feed thee and all thy fellowship of the
Round Table. So she departed and went that same way that she came.


CHAPTER VI.
-----------

_How King Arthur had all the knights together, for to just in the
meadow beside Camelot or they departed._

Now, said the king, I am sure at this quest of the Sancgreal shall all
ye of the Table Round depart, and never shall I see you again whole
together, therefore I will see you all whole together in the meadow of
Camelot, to just and to tourney, that after your death men may speak of
it, that such good knights were wholly together such a day. As unto
that counsel, and at the king's request, they accorded all, and took on
their harness that longed unto justing. But all this moving of the king
was for this intent, for to see Galahad proved, for the king deemed he
should not lightly come again unto the court after his departing. So
were they assembled in the meadow, both more and less. Then Sir
Galahad, by the prayer of the king and the queen, did upon him a noble
jesserance, and also he did on his helm, but shield would he take none
for no prayer of the king. And then Sir Gawaine and other knights
prayed him to take a spear. Right so he did; and the queen was in a
tower with all her ladies for to behold that tournament. Then Sir
Galahad dressed him in the midst of the meadow, and began to break
spears marvellously, that all men had wonder of him, for he there
surmounted all other knights, for within a while he had thrown down
many good knights of the Table Round save twain, that was Sir Launcelot
and Sir Percivale.


CHAPTER VII.
------------

_How the queen desired to see Galahad, and how after all the knights
were replenished with the holy Sangreal, and how they avowed the
enquest of the same._

Then the king, at the queen's request, made him to alight and to unlace
his helm, that the queen might see him in the visage. And when she
beheld him she said, Soothly, I dare well say that Sir Launcelot is his
father, for never two men resembled more in likeness, therefore it is
no marvel though he be of great prowess. So a lady that stood by the
queen said, Madam, ought he of right to be so good a knight? Yea,
forsooth, said the queen, for he is of all parties come of the best
knights of the world, and of the highest lineage; for Sir Launcelot is
come but of the eighth degree from our Lord Jesu Christ, and Sir
Galahad is of the ninth degree from our Lord Jesu Christ; therefore I
dare say they be the greatest gentlemen of the world. And then the king
and all estates went home unto Camelot, and so went to evensong to the
great minster. And so after upon that to supper, and every knight sat
in his own place as they were toforehand. Then anon they heard cracking
and crying of thunder, that them thought the place should all to-drive.
In the midst of this blast entered a sun-beam more clearer by seven
times than ever they saw day, and all they were alighted of the grace
of the Holy Ghost. Then began every knight to behold other, and either
saw other by their seeming fairer than ever they saw afore. Not for
then there was no knight might speak one word a great while, and so
they looked every man on other, as they had been dumb. Then there
entered into the hall the holy Graile covered with white samite, but
there was none might see it, nor who bare it. And there was all the
hall full filled with good odours, and every knight had such meats and
drinks as he best loved in this world: and when the holy Graile had
been borne through the hall, then the holy vessel departed suddenly,
that they wist not where it became. Then had they all breath to speak.
And then the king yielded thankings unto God of his good grace that he
had sent them. Certes, said the king, we ought to thank our Lord Jesu
greatly, for that he hath shewed us this day at the reverence of this
high feast of Pentecost. Now, said Sir Gawaine, we have been served
this day of what meats and drinks we thought on, but one thing beguiled
us, we might not see the holy Graile, it was so preciously covered;
wherefore I will make here avow, that to-morn, without longer abiding,
I shall labour in the quest of the Sancgreal, that I shall hold me out
a twelvemonth and a day, or more if need be, and never shall I return
again unto the court till I have seen it more openly than it hath been
seen here: and if I may not speed, I shall return again as he that may
not be against the will of our Lord Jesu Christ. When they of the Table
Round heard Sir Gawaine say so, they arose up the most party, and made
such avows as Sir Gawaine had made.

Anon as king Arthur heard this he was greatly displeased, for he wist
well that they might not againsay their avows. Alas! said king Arthur
unto Sir Gawaine, ye have nigh slain me with the avow and promise that
ye have made. For through you ye have bereft me of the fairest
fellowship and the truest of knighthood that ever were seen together in
any realm of the world. For when they depart from hence, I am sure they
all shall never meet more in this world, for they shall die many in the
quest. And so it forethinketh me a little, for I have loved them as
well as my life, wherefore it shall grieve me right sore the
departition of this fellowship. For I have had an old custom to have
them in my fellowship.


CHAPTER VIII.
-------------

_How great sorrow was made of the king and the queen and ladies for the
departing of the knights, and how they departed._

And therewith the tears filled in his eyes. And then he said, Gawaine,
Gawaine, ye have set me in great sorrow. For I have great doubt that my
true fellowship shall never meet here more again. Ah, said Sir
Launcelot, comfort yourself, for it shall be unto us as a great honour,
and much more than if we died in any other places, for of death we be
sure. Ah Launcelot, said the king, the great love that I have had unto
you all the days of my life maketh me to say such doleful words; for
never christian king had never so many worthy men at this table as I
have had this day at the Round Table, and that is my great sorrow. When
the queen, ladies, and gentlewomen wist these tidings, they had such
sorrow and heaviness that there might no tongue tell it, for those
knights had holden them in honour and charity. But among all other
queen Guenever made great sorrow. I marvel, said she, my lord would
suffer them to depart from him. Thus was all the court troubled, for
the love of the departition of those knights. And many of those ladies
that loved knights would have gone with their lovers; and so had they
done, had not an old knight come among them in religious clothing, and
then he spake all on high and said, Fair lords which have sworn in the
quest of the Sancgreal, thus sendeth you Nacien the hermit word, that
none in this quest lead lady nor gentlewoman with him, for it is not to
do in so high a service as they labour in, for I warn you plain, he
that is not clean of his sins he shall not see the mysteries of our
Lord Jesu Christ; and for this cause they left these ladies and
gentlewomen. After this the queen came unto Galahad, and asked him of
whence he was, and of what country? He told her of whence he was. And
son unto Sir Launcelot, she said he was: as to that he said neither yea
nor nay. Truly, said the queen, of your father ye need not to shame
you, for he is the goodliest knight and of the best men of the world
come, and of the stock, of all parties, of kings. Wherefore ye ought of
right to be of your deeds a passing good man, and certainly, she said,
ye resemble him much. Then Sir Galahad was a little ashamed, and said,
Madam, sith ye know in certain, wherefore do ye ask it me? for he that
is my father shall be known openly, and all betimes. And then they went
to rest them. And in the honour of the highness of Galahad he was led
into king Arthur's chamber, and there rested in his own bed. And as
soon as it was day the king arose, for he had no rest of all that night
for sorrow. Then he went unto Gawaine and to Sir Launcelot, that were
arisen for to hear mass. And then the king again said, Ah Gawaine,
Gawaine, ye have betrayed me. For never shall my court be amended by
you, but ye will never be sorry for me, as I am for you. And therewith
the tears began to run down by his visage. And therewith the king said,
Ah knight, Sir Launcelot, I require thee thou counsel me, for I would
that this quest were undone, and it might be. Sir, said Sir Launcelot,
ye saw yesterday so many worthy knights that then were sworn, that they
may not leave it in no manner of wise. That wot I well, said the king,
but it shall so heavy me at their departing, that I wot well there
shall no manner of joy remedy me. And then the king and the queen went
unto the minster. So anon Launcelot and Gawaine commanded their men to
bring their arms. And when they all were armed, save their shields and
their helms, then they came to their fellowship, which all were ready
in the same wise for to go to the minster to hear their service.

Then after the service was done, the king would wit how many had taken
the quest of the holy Graile, and to account them he prayed them all.
Then found they by tale an hundred and fifty, and all were knights of
the Round Table. And then they put on their helms, and departed, and
recommanded them all wholly unto the queen, and there was weeping and
great sorrow. Then the queen departed into her chamber so that no man
should perceive her great sorrows. When Sir Launcelot missed the queen
he went into her chamber, and when she saw him she cried aloud, O, Sir
Launcelot, ye have betrayed me and put me to death, for to leave thus
my lord. Ah, madam, said Sir Launcelot, I pray you be not displeased,
for I shall come again as soon as I may with my worship. Alas, said
she, that ever I saw you! but He that suffered death upon the cross for
all mankind, be to your good conduct and safety, and all the whole
fellowship. Right so departed Sir Launcelot, and found his fellowship
that abode his coming. And so they mounted upon their horses, and rode
through the streets of Camelot, and there was weeping of the rich and
poor, and the king turned away, and might not speak for weeping. So
within a while they came to a city and a castle that hight Vagon: there
they entered into the castle, and the lord of that castle was an old
man that hight Vagon, and he was a good man of his living, and set open
the gates, and made them all the good cheer that he might. And so on
the morrow they were all accorded that they should depart every each
from other. And then they departed on the morrow with weeping and
mourning cheer, and every knight took the way that him best liked.


CHAPTER IX.
-----------

_How Galahad gat him a shield, and how they sped that presumed to take
down the said shield._

Now rideth Sir Galahad yet without shield, and so he rode four days
without any adventure. And at the fourth day after even-song he came to
a white abbey, and there he was received with great reverence, and led
to a chamber, and then he was unarmed, and then was he ware of two
knights of the Round Table, one was king Bagdemagus, and that other was
Sir Uwaine. And when they saw him they went unto him and made of him
great solace, and so they went to supper. Sirs, said Sir Galahad, what
adventure brought you hither? Sir, said they, it is told us that within
this place is a shield that no man may bear about his neck but that if
he be mischieved or dead within three days, or else maimed for ever.
Ah, sir, said king Bagdemagus, I shall bear it to-morrow for to assay
this strange adventure. In the name of God, said Sir Galahad. Sir, said
Bagdemagus, and I may not achieve the adventure of this shield ye shall
take it upon you, for I am sure ye shall not fail. Sir, said Galahad, I
agree right well thereto, for I have no shield. So on the morn they
arose and heard mass. Then king Bagdemagus asked where the adventurous
shield was. Anon a monk led him behind an altar where the shield hung
as white as any snow, but in the midst was a red cross. Sir, said the
monk, this shield ought not to be hanged about no knight's neck, but he
be the worthiest knight of the world, and therefore I counsel you
knights to be well advised. Well, said king Bagdemagus, I wot well that
I am not the best knight of the world, but yet shall I assay to bear
it. And so he bare it out of the monastery; and then he said unto Sir
Galahad, If it will please you, I pray you abide here still, till ye
know how I shall speed. I shall abide you here, said Galahad. Then king
Bagdemagus took with him a squire, the which should bring tidings unto
Sir Galahad how he sped. Then when they had ridden a two mile, and came
in a fair valley afore an hermitage, then they saw a goodly knight come
from that part in white armour, horse and all, and he came as fast as
his horse might run with his spear in the rest, and king Bagdemagus
dressed his spear against him, and brake it upon the white knight; but
the other struck him so hard that he brake the mails, and thrust him
through the right shoulder, for the shield covered him not as at that
time, and so he bare him from his horse, and therewith he alighted and
took the white shield from him, saying, Knight, thou hast done thyself
great folly, for this shield ought not to be borne but by him that
shall have no peer that liveth. And then he came to king Bagdemagus's
squire and said, Bear this shield unto the good knight Sir Galahad,
that thou left in the abbey, and greet him well from me. Sir, said the
squire, what is your name? Take thou no heed of my name, said the
knight, for it is not for thee to know, nor for none earthly man. Now,
fair sir, said the squire, at the reverence of Jesu Christ tell me for
what cause this shield may not be borne, but if the bearer thereof be
mischieved. Now, sith thou hast conjured me so, said the knight, this
shield behoveth to no man but unto Galahad. And the squire went unto
Bagdemagus and asked him whether he were sore wounded or not? Yea
forsooth, said he, I shall escape hard from the death. Then he fetched
his horse, and brought him with great pain unto an abbey. Then was he
taken down softly, and unarmed, and laid in a bed, and there was looked
to his wounds. And, as the book telleth, he lay there long, and escaped
hard with the life.


CHAPTER X.
----------

_How Galahad departed with the shield. And how king Evelake had
received the shield of Joseph of Aramathie._

Sir Galahad, said the squire, that knight that wounded Bagdemagus
sendeth you greeting, and bad that ye should bear this shield, where
through great adventures should befall. Now blessed be God and fortune,
said Sir Galahad. And then he asked his arms, and mounted upon his
horse, and hung the white shield about his neck, and commended them
unto God. And Sir Uwaine said he would bear him fellowship if it
pleased him. Sir, said Galahad, that may ye not, for I must go alone,
save this squire shall bear me fellowship: and so departed Uwaine. Then
within a while came Galahad there as the white knight abode him by the
hermitage, and every each saluted other courteously. Sir, said Galahad,
by this shield been many marvels fallen. Sir, said the knight, it
befell after the passion of our Lord Jesu Christ thirty-two year, that
Joseph of Armathie, the gentle knight the which took down our Lord off
the holy cross, at that time he departed from Jerusalem with a great
party of his kindred with him. And so he laboured till that they came
to a city that hight Sarras. And at that same hour that Joseph came to
Sarras, there was a king that hight Evelake, that had great war against
the Saracens, and in especially against one Saracen, the which was the
king Evelake's cousin, a rich king and a mighty, which marched nigh
this land, and his name was called Tolleme la Feintes. So on a day this
two met to do battle. Then Joseph, the son of Joseph of Armathie, went
to king Evelake, and told him he should be discomfit and slain, but if
he left his belief of the old law, and believed upon the new law. And
then there he shewed him the right belief of the Holy Trinity, to the
which he agreed unto with all his heart, and there this shield was made
for king Evelake, in the name of Him that died upon the cross. And then
through his good belief he had the better of king Tolleme. For when
Evelake was in the battle, there was a cloth set afore the shield, and
when he was in the greatest peril he let put away the cloth, and then
his enemies saw a figure of a man on the cross, where through they all
were discomfit. And so it befell that a man of king Evelake's was
smitten his hand off, and bare that hand in his other hand. And Joseph
called that man unto him, and bad him, Go with good devotion, touch the
cross. And as soon as that man had touched the cross with his hand, it
was as whole as ever it was tofore. Then soon after there fell a great
marvel, that the cross of the shield at one time vanished away, that no
man wist where it became. And then king Evelake was baptised, and for
the most part all the people of that city. So soon after Joseph would
depart, and king Evelake would go with him, whether he would or nould.
And so by fortune they came into this land, that at that time was
called Great Britain. And there they found a great felon paynim, that
put Joseph into prison. And so by fortune tidings came unto a worthy
man that hight Mondrames, and he assembled all his people, for the
great renown he had heard of Joseph, and so he came into the land of
Great Britain, and disherited this felon paynim and consumed him, and
therewith delivered Joseph out of prison. And after that all the people
were turned to the christian faith.


CHAPTER XI.
-----------

_How Joseph made a cross on the white shield with his blood, and how
Galahad was by a monk brought to a tomb._

Not long after that Joseph was laid in his deadly bed. And when king
Evelake saw that, he made much sorrow, and said, For thy love I have
left my country, and sith ye shall depart out of this world leave me
some token of yours, that I may think on you. Joseph said, that will I
do full gladly. Now bring me your shield that I took you when ye went
into battle against king Tolleme. Then Joseph bled sore at the nose
that he might not by no means be staunched. And there upon that shield
he made a cross of his own blood. Now may ye see a remembrance that I
love you, for ye shall never see this shield but ye shall think on me,
and it shall be always as fresh as it is now; and never shall no man
bear this shield about his neck but he shall repent it, unto the time
that Galahad the good knight bear it, and the last of my lineage shall
have it about his neck, that shall do many marvellous deeds. Now, said
king Evelake, where shall I put this shield, that this worthy knight
may have it? Ye shall leave it there as Nacien the hermit shall be put
after his death. For thither shall that good knight come the fifteenth
day after that he shall receive the order of knighthood. And so that
day that they set is this time that ye have his shield. And in the same
abbey lieth Nacien the hermit. And then the white knight vanished away.
Anon, as the squire had heard these words, he alight off his hackney,
and kneeled down at Galahad's feet, and prayed him that he might go
with him till he had made him knight.--If I would not refuse you?--Then
will ye make me a knight, said the squire, and that order, by the grace
of God, shall be well set in me. So Sir Galahad granted him, and turned
again unto the abbey there they came from. And there men made great joy
of Sir Galahad. And anon as he was alight, there was a monk brought him
unto a tomb in a church-yard, where that was such a noise that who that
heard it should verily nigh be mad or lose his strength. And, sir, they
said, we deem it is a fiend.


CHAPTER XII.
------------

_Of the marvel that Sir Galahad saw and heard in the tomb, and how he
made Melias knight._

Now lead me thither, said Galahad. And so they did, all armed save his
helm. Now, said the good man, go to the tomb and lift it up. So he did,
and heard a great noise, and piteously he said that all men might hear
it. Sir Galahad, the servant of Jesu Christ, come thou not nigh me, for
thou shalt make me go again there where I have been so long. But
Galahad was nothing afraid, but lift up the stone, and there came out
so foul a smoke, and after he saw the foulest figure leap thereout that
ever he saw in the likeness of a man; and then he blessed him, and wist
well it was a fiend. Then heard he a voice say, Galahad, I see there
environ about thee so many angels that my power may not dare thee.
Right so Sir Galahad saw a body all armed lie in that tomb, and beside
him a sword. Now, fair brother, said Galahad, let us remove this body,
for it is not worthy to lie in this church-yard, for he was a false
Christian man. And therewith they all departed and went to the abbey.
And anon as he was unarmed, a good man came and set him down by him,
and said, Sir, I shall tell you what betokeneth all that ye saw in the
tomb: For that covered body betokeneth the duresse of the world, and
the great sin that our Lord found in the world, for there was such
wretchedness that the father loved not the son, nor the son loved not
the father, and that was one of the causes that our Lord took flesh and
blood of a clean maiden; for our sins were so great at that time that
well nigh all was wickedness. Truly, said Galahad, I believe you right
well. So Sir Galahad rested him there that night. And upon the morn he
made the squire knight, and asked him his name, and of what kindred he
was come. Sir, said he, men call me Melias de Lile, and I am the son of
the king of Denmark. Now, fair sir, said Galahad, sith ye be come of
kings and queens, now look that knighthood be well set in you, for ye
ought to be a mirror unto all chivalry. Sir, said Melias, ye say sooth.
But, sir, sithen ye have made me a knight, ye must of right grant me my
first desire that is reasonable. Ye say sooth, said Galahad. Then
Melias said, that ye will suffer me to ride with you in this quest of
the Sancgreal till that some adventure depart us.--I grant you, sir.
Then men brought Sir Melias his armour, and his spear, and his horse;
and so Sir Galahad and he rode forth all that week ere they found any
adventure. And then upon a Monday, in the morning, as they were
departed from an abbey, they came to a cross which departed two ways;
and in that cross were letters written, that said thus: Now ye knights
errant, the which goeth to seek knights adventurous, see here two ways;
that one way defendeth thee that thou ne go that way, for he shall not
go out of the way again, but if he be a good man and a worthy knight;
and if thou go on the left hand, thou shalt not there lightly win
prowess, for thou shalt in this way be soon assayed. Sir, said Melias
to Galahad, if it like you to suffer me to take the way on the left
hand, tell me, for there I shall well prove my strength. It were
better, said Galahad, ye rode not that way, for I deem I should better
escape in that way than ye.--Nay, my lord, I pray you let me have that
adventure.--Take it, in God's name, said Galahad.


CHAPTER XIII.
-------------

_Of the adventure that Melias had, and how Galahad revenged him, and
how Melias was carried into an abbey._

And then rode Melias into an old forest, and therein he rode two days
and more. And then he came into a fair meadow, and there was a fair
lodge of boughs. And then he espied in that lodge a chair, wherein was
a crown of gold subtily wrought. Also there was clothes covered upon
the earth, and many delicious meats were set thereon. Sir Melias beheld
this adventure, and thought it marvellous, but he had no hunger, but of
the crown of gold he took much keep, and therewith he stooped down, and
took it up, and rode his way with it. And anon he saw a knight came
riding after him that said, Knight, set down that crown which is not
yours, and therefore defend you. Then Sir Melias blessed him, and said,
Fair Lord of heaven, help and save thy new-made knight. And then they
let their horses run as fast as they might, so that the other knight
smote Sir Melias through hauberk and through the left side, that he
fell to the earth nigh dead. And then he took the crown and went his
way, and Sir Melias lay still and had no power to stir. In the
meanwhile by fortune there came Sir Galahad and found him there in
peril of death. And then he said, Ah, Melias, who hath wounded you?
therefore it had been better to have ridden that other way. And when
Sir Melias heard him speak, Sir, he said, for God's love let me not die
in this forest, but bear me unto the abbey here beside, that I may be
confessed and have my rites. It shall be done, said Galahad, but where
is he that hath wounded you? With that Sir Galahad heard in the leaves
cry on high, Knight, keep thee from me! Ah sir, said Melias, beware,
for that is he that hath slain me. Sir Galahad answered, Sir knight,
come on your peril. Then either dressed to other, and came together as
fast as their horses might run; and Galahad smote him so that his spear
went through his shoulder, and smote him down off his horse, and in the
falling Galahad's spear brake. With that came out another knight out of
the leaves and brake a spear upon Galahad, or ever he might turn him.
Then Galahad drew out his sword and smote off the left arm of him, so
that it fell to the earth. And then he fled, and Sir Galahad sued fast
after him. And then he turned again unto Sir Melias, and there he
alight and dressed him softly on his horse tofore him, for the
truncheon of his spear was in his body, and Sir Galahad start up behind
him, and held him in his arms, and so brought him to the abbey, and
there unarmed him and brought him to his chamber. And then he asked his
Saviour. And when he had received Him he said unto Sir Galahad, Sir,
let death come when it pleaseth him. And therewith he drew out the
truncheon of the spear out of his body: and then he swooned. Then came
there an old monk, which sometime had been a knight, and beheld Sir
Melias. And anon he ransacked him, and then he said unto Sir Galahad, I
shall heal him of this wound, by the grace of God, within the term of
seven weeks. Then was Sir Galahad glad, and unarmed him, and said he
would abide there three days. And then he asked Sir Melias how it stood
with him. Then he said, he was turned unto helping, God be thanked.


CHAPTER XIV.
------------

_How Sir Galahad departed, and how he was commanded to go to the castle
of maidens to destroy the wicked custom._

Now will I depart, said Galahad, for I have much on hand, for many good
knights be full busy about it, and this knight and I were in the same
quest of the Sancgreal. Sir, said a good man, for his sin he was thus
wounded: and I marvel, said the good man, how ye durst take upon you so
rich a thing as the high order of knighthood without clean confession,
and that was the cause ye were bitterly wounded. For the way on the
right hand betokeneth the high way of our Lord Jesu Christ, and the way
of a true good liver. And the other way betokeneth the way of sinners
and of misbelievers. And when the devil saw your pride and presumption
for to take you in the quest of the holy Sancgreal, that made you to be
overthrown, for it may not be achieved but by virtuous living. Also,
the writing on the cross was a signification of heavenly deeds, and of
knightly deeds in God's works, and no knightly deeds in worldly works;
and pride is head of all deadly sins, that caused this knight to depart
from Sir Galahad: and where thou tookest the crown of gold thou
sinnedst in covetise and in theft. All this were no knightly deeds. And
this Galahad the holy knight, the which fought with the two knights,
the two knights signify the two deadly sins which were wholly in this
knight Sir Melias, and they might not withstand you, for ye are without
deadly sin. Now departed Galahad from thence, and betaught them all
unto God. Sir Melias said, My lord Galahad, as soon as I may ride I
shall seek you. God send you health, said Galahad; and so took his
horse and departed and rode many journeys forward and backward, as
adventure would lead him. And at the last it happened him to depart
from a place or a castle, the which was named Abblasoure, and he had
heard no mass, the which he was wont ever to hear or that he departed
out of any castle or place, and kept that for a custom. Then Sir
Galahad came unto a mountain, where he found an old chapel, and found
there nobody, for all all was desolate, and there he kneeled tofore the
altar, and besought God of wholesome counsel. So, as he prayed, he
heard a voice that said, Go thou now, thou adventurous knight, to the
Castle of Maidens, and there do thou away the wicked customs.


CHAPTER XV.
-----------

_How Sir Galahad fought with the knights of the castle, and destroyed
the wicked custom._

When Sir Galahad heard this he thanked God, and took his horse, and he
had not ridden but half a mile, he saw in a valley afore him a strong
castle with deep ditches, and there ran beside it a fair river, that
hight Severn, and there he met with a man of great age, and either
saluted other, and Galahad asked him the castle's name? Fair sir, said
he, it is the Castle of Maidens. That is a cursed castle, said Galahad,
and all they that be conversant therein; for all pity is out thereof,
and all hardiness and mischief is therein.--Therefore I counsel you,
sir knight, to turn again. Sir, said Galahad, wit you well I shall not
turn again. Then looked Sir Galahad on his arms that nothing failed
him, and then he put his shield afore him, and anon there met him seven
fair maidens, the which said unto him, Sir knight, ye ride here in a
great folly, for ye have the water to pass over. Why should I not pass
the water? said Galahad. So rode he away from them, and met with a
squire that said, Knight, those knights in the castle defy you, and
forbid you, ye go no further till that they wit what ye would. Fair
sir, said Galahad, I come for to destroy the wicked custom of this
castle.--Sir, and ye will abide by that, ye shall have enough to
do.--Go you now, said Galahad, and haste my needs. Then the squire
entered into the castle. And anon after there came out of the castle
seven knights, and all were brethren. And when they saw Galahad, they
cried, Knight, keep thee, for we assure thee nothing but death. Why,
said Galahad, will ye all have ado with me at once? Yea, said they,
thereto mayest thou trust. Then Galahad put forth his spear, and smote
the foremost to the earth, that near he brake his neck. And therewith
all the other smote him on his shield great strokes, so that their
spears brake. Then Sir Galahad drew out his sword, and set upon them so
hard that it was marvel to see it, and so, through great force, he made
them to forsake the field; and Galahad chased them till they entered
into the castle, and so passed through the castle at another gate. And
there met Sir Galahad an old man, clothed in religious clothing, and
said, Sir, have here the keys of this castle. Then Sir Galahad opened
the gates, and saw so much people in the streets that he might not
number them, and all said, Sir, ye be welcome, for long have we abiden
here our deliverance. Then came to him a gentlewoman, and said, These
knights be fled, but they will come again this night, and here to begin
again their evil custom. What will ye that I shall do? said Galahad.
Sir, said the gentlewoman, that ye send after all the knights hither
that hold their lands of this castle, and make them to swear for to use
the customs that were used heretofore of old time. I will well, said
Galahad. And there she brought him an horn of ivory, bounden with gold
richly, and said, Sir, blow this horn, which will be heard two mile
about this castle. When Sir Galahad had blown the horn he set him down
upon a bed. Then came a priest unto Galahad, and said, Sir, it is past
a seven year agone that these seven brethren came into this castle, and
harboured with the lord of this castle, that hight the duke Lianour,
and he was lord of all this country. And when they espied the duke's
daughter that was a full fair woman, then by their false covin they
made debate betwixt themselves, and the duke of his goodness would have
departed them; and there they slew him and his eldest son. And then
they took the maiden, and the treasure of the castle. And then by great
force they held all the knights of this castle against their will under
their obeisance, and in great servage and truage, robbing and pilling
the poor common people of all that they had. So it happened on a day
the duke's daughter said, Ye have done unto me great wrong to slay mine
own father and my brother, and thus to hold our lands: not for then,
she said, ye shall not hold this castle for many years, for by one
knight ye shall be overcome. Thus she prophesied seven years agone.
Well, said the seven knights, sithen ye say so, there shall never lady
nor knight pass this castle, but they shall abide maugre their heads,
or die therefore, till that knight be come by whom we shall lose this
castle. And therefore it is called the Maidens' Castle, for they have
devoured many maidens. Now, said Sir Galahad, is she here for whom this
castle was lost? Nay, said the priest, she was dead within these three
nights after that she was thus enforced; and sithen have they kept her
younger sister, which endureth great pains with many other ladies. By
this were the knights of the country come. And then he made them do
homage and fealty to the duke's daughter, and set them in great ease of
heart. And in the morn there came one to Galahad, and told him how that
Gawaine, Gareth, and Uwaine had slain the seven brethren. I suppose
well, said Sir Galahad: and took his armour and his horse and commended
them unto God.


CHAPTER XVI.
------------

_How Sir Gawaine came to the Abbey for to follow Galahad, and how he
was shriven to a Hermit._

Now, saith the tale, after Sir Gawaine departed, he rode many journeys
both toward and froward. And at the last he came to the abbey where Sir
Galahad had the white shield. And there Sir Gawaine learned the way to
sue after Sir Galahad, and so he rode to the abbey where Melias lay
sick, and there Sir Melias told Sir Gawaine of the marvellous adventure
that Sir Galahad did. Certes, said Sir Gawaine, I am not happy that I
took not the way that he went; for, and I may meet with him, I will not
depart from him lightly, for all marvellous adventures Sir Galahad
achieveth. Sir, said one of the monks, he will not of your fellowship.
Why? said Sir Gawaine. Sir, said he, for ye be wicked and sinful, and
he is full blessed.

Right as they thus stood talking together, there came in riding Sir
Gareth. And then they made joy either of other. And on the morn they
heard mass, and so departed. And by the way they met with Sir Uwaine
les Avoutres. And there Sir Uwaine told Sir Gawaine how he had met with
none adventure sith he departed from the court. Nor we, said Sir
Gawaine. And either promised other of those three knights not to depart
while that they were in that quest, but if fortune caused it. So they
departed and rode by fortune till that they came by the Castle of
Maidens. And there the seven brethren espied the three knights, and
said, Sithen we be banished by one knight from this castle, we shall
destroy all the knights of king Arthur's that we may overcome, for the
love of Sir Galahad. And therewith the seven knights set upon the three
knights: and by fortune Sir Gawaine slew one of the brethren, and each
one of his fellows slew another, and so slew the remnant. And then they
took the way under the castle; and there they lost the way that Sir
Galahad rode, and there every each of them departed from other, and Sir
Gawaine rode till he came to an hermitage, and there he found the good
man saying his evensong of Our Lady. And there Sir Gawaine asked
harbour for charity, and the good man granted it him gladly. Then the
good man asked him what he was? Sir, he said, I am a knight of king
Arthur's, that am in the quest of the Sancgreal, and my name is Sir
Gawaine. Sir, said the good man, I would wit how it standeth betwixt
God and you? Sir, said Sir Gawaine, I will with a good will shew you my
life, if it please you. And there he told the hermit how a monk of an
abbey called me wicked knight. He might well say it, said the hermit,
for when ye were first made knight, ye should have taken you to
knightly deeds and virtuous living, and ye have done the contrary, for
ye have lived mischievously many winters, and Sir Galahad is a maid,
and sinned never, and that is the cause he shall achieve where he goeth
that ye nor none such shall not attain, nor none in your fellowship;
for ye have used the most untruest life that ever I heard knight live.
For, certes, had ye not been so wicked as ye are, never had the seven
brethren been slain by you and your two fellows. For Sir Galahad,
himself alone, beat them all seven the day before, but his living is
such he shall slay no man lightly. Also I may say you, the Castle of
Maidens betokeneth the good souls that were in prison afore the
Incarnation of Jesu Christ. And the seven knights betoken the seven
deadly sins that reigned that time in the world. And I may liken the
good Galahad unto the Son of the High Father, that light within a maid,
and bought all the souls out of thrall: so did Sir Galahad deliver all
the maidens out of the woful castle. Now, Sir Gawaine, said the good
man, thou must do penance for thy sin.--Sir, what penance shall I
do?--Such as I will give, said the good man. Nay, said Sir Gawaine, I
may do no penance; for we knights adventurous often suffer great woe
and pain. Well, said the good man, and then he held his peace. And on
the morn Sir Gawaine departed from the hermit, and betaught him unto
God. And by adventure he met with Sir Aglovale and Sir Griflet, two
knights of the Table Round. And they two rode four days without finding
of any adventure, and at the fifth day they departed. And every each
held as fell them by adventure.

Here leaveth the tale of Sir Gawaine and his fellows, and speak we of
Sir Galahad.


CHAPTER XVII.
-------------

_How Sir Galahad met with Sir Launcelot and with Sir Percivale, and
smote them down, and departed from them._

So when Sir Galahad was departed from the Castle of Maidens, he rode
till he came to a waste forest, and there he met with Sir Launcelot and
Sir Percivale, but they knew him not, for he was new disguised. Right
so, Sir Launcelot his father dressed his spear, and brake it upon Sir
Galahad, and Sir Galahad smote him so again, that he smote down horse
and man. And then he drew his sword, and dressed him unto Sir
Percivale, and smote him so on the helm that it rove to the coif of
steel, and had not the sword swerved Sir Percivale had been slain, and
with the stroke he fell out of his saddle. This justs was done tofore
the hermitage where a recluse dwelled. And when she saw Sir Galahad
ride, she said, God be with thee, best knight of the world. Ah certes,
said she all aloud, that Launcelot and Percivale might hear it, and
yonder two knights had known thee as well as I do, they would not have
encountered with thee. When Sir Galahad heard her say so he was sore
adread to be known: therewith he smote his horse with his spurs, and
rode a great pace froward them. Then perceived they both that he was
Galahad, and up they gat on their horses, and rode fast after him, but
in a while he was out of their sight. And then they turned again with
heavy cheer. Let us spere some tidings, said Percivale, at yonder
recluse. Do as ye list, said Sir Launcelot. When Sir Percivale came to
the recluse, she knew him well enough, and Sir Launcelot both. But Sir
Launcelot rode overthwart and endlong in a wild forest, and held no
path, but as wild adventure led him. And at the last he came to a stony
cross, which departed two ways in waste land, and by the cross was a
stone that was of marble, but it was so dark that Sir Launcelot might
not wit what it was. Then Sir Launcelot looked by him, and saw an old
chapel, and there he wend to have found people. And Sir Launcelot tied
his horse till a tree, and there he did off his shield, and hung it
upon a tree. And then he went to the chapel door, and found it waste
and broken. And within he found a fair altar full richly arrayed with
cloth of clean silk, and there stood a fair clean candlestick which
bare six great candles, and the candlestick was of silver. And when Sir
Launcelot saw this light, he had great will for to enter into the
chapel, but he could find no place where he might enter: then was he
passing heavy and dismayed. Then he returned and came to his horse, and
did off his saddle and bridle, and let him pasture; and unlaced his
helm, and ungirded his sword, and laid him down to sleep upon his
shield tofore the cross.


CHAPTER XVIII.
--------------

_How Sir Launcelot, half sleeping and half waking, saw a sick man borne
in a litter, and how he was healed with the Sangreal._

And so he fell on sleep, and half waking and half sleeping he saw come
by him two palfreys all fair and white, the which bare a litter,
therein lying a sick knight. And when he was nigh the cross, he there
abode still. All this Sir Launcelot saw and beheld, for he slept not
verily; and he heard him say, Oh, sweet Lord, when shall this sorrow
leave me? and when shall the holy vessel come by me where through I
shall be blessed? For I have endured thus long for little trespass. A
full great while complained the knight thus, and always Sir Launcelot
heard it. With that Sir Launcelot saw the candlestick with the six
tapers come before the cross, and he saw nobody that brought it. Also
there came a table of silver, and the holy vessel of the Sancgreal,
which Sir Launcelot had seen aforetime in king Peschour's house. And
therewith the sick knight set him up, and held up both his hands, and
said, Fair sweet Lord, which is here within this holy vessel, take heed
unto me, that I may be whole of this malady. And therewith on his hands
and on his knees he went so nigh that he touched the holy vessel, and
kissed it, and anon he was whole, and then he said, Lord God I thank
thee, for I am healed of this sickness. So when the holy vessel had
been there a great while it went unto the chapel, with the chandelier
and the light, so that Launcelot wist not where it was become, for he
was overtaken with sin that he had no power to arise against the holy
vessel; wherefore after that many men said of him shame, but he took
repentance after that. Then the sick knight dressed him up, and kissed
the cross. Anon his squire brought him his arms, and asked his lord how
he did? Certes, said he, I thank God right well, through the holy
vessel I am healed. But I have great marvel of this sleeping knight,
that had no power to awake when this holy vessel was brought hither. I
dare right well say, said the squire, that he dwelleth in some deadly
sin, whereof he was never confessed. By my faith, said the knight,
whatsoever he be he is unhappy, for as I deem he is of the fellowship
of the Round Table, the which is entered into the quest of the
Sancgreal. Sir, said the squire, here I have brought you all your arms,
save your helm and your sword, and therefore by my assent now may ye
take this knight's helm and his sword. And so he did. And when he was
clean armed he took Sir Launcelot's horse, for he was better than his
own: and so departed they from the cross.


CHAPTER XIX.
------------

_How a voice spake to Sir Launcelot, and how he found his horse and his
helm borne away, and after went afoot._

Then anon Sir Launcelot waked, and set him up, and bethought him what
he had seen there, and whether it were dreams or not. Right so heard he
a voice that said, Sir Launcelot, more harder than is the stone, and
more bitter than is the wood, and more naked and barer than is the leaf
of the fig-tree, therefore go thou from hence and withdraw thee from
this holy place. And when Sir Launcelot heard this he was passing
heavy, and wist not what to do, and so departed, sore weeping, and
cursed the time that he was born. For then he deemed never to have had
worship more. For those words went to his heart, till that he knew
wherefore he was called so. Then Sir Launcelot went to the cross, and
found his helm, his sword, and his horse, taken away. And then he
called himself a very wretch, and most unhappy of all knights: and
there he said, My sin and my wickedness have brought me unto great
dishonour. For when I sought worldly adventures for worldly desires I
ever achieved them, and had the better in every place, and never was I
discomfit in no quarrel, were it right or wrong. And now I take upon me
the adventures of holy things, and now I see and understand that mine
old sin hindereth me, and shameth me, so that I had no power to stir
nor to speak when the holy blood appeared afore me. So thus he sorrowed
till it was day, and heard the fowls sing: then somewhat he was
comforted. But when Sir Launcelot missed his horse and his harness,
then he wist well God was displeased with him. Then he departed from
the cross on foot into a forest. And so by prime he came to an high
hill, and found an hermitage, and an hermit therein, which was going
unto mass. And then Launcelot kneeled down and cried on our Lord mercy
for his wicked works. So when mass was done, Launcelot called him, and
prayed him for charity for to hear his life. With a good will, said the
good man. Sir, said he, be ye of king Arthur's court, and of the
fellowship of the Round Table? Yea forsooth, and my name is Sir
Launcelot du Lake, that hath been right well said of, and now my good
fortune is changed, for I am the most wretch of the world. The hermit
beheld him, and had marvel how he was so abashed. Sir, said the hermit,
ye ought to thank God more than any knight living; for He hath caused
you to have more worldly worship than any knight that now liveth. And
for your presumption to take upon you in deadly sin for to be in His
presence, where His flesh and His blood was, that caused you ye might
not see it with worldly eyes, for He will not appear where such sinners
be, but if it be unto their great hurt, and unto their great shame. And
there is no knight living now that ought to give God so great thanks as
ye; for He hath given you beauty, seemliness, and great strength, above
all other knights, and therefore ye are the more beholding unto God
than any other man to love Him and dread Him; for your strength and
manhood will little avail you and God be against you.


CHAPTER XX.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot was shriven, and what sorrow he made; and of the
good ensamples which were shewed him._

Then Sir Launcelot wept with heavy cheer, and said, Now I know well ye
say me sooth. Sir, said the good man, hide none old sin from me. Truly,
said Sir Launcelot, that were me full loth to discover. For this
fourteen years I never discovered one thing that I have used, and that
may I now blame my shame and my misadventure. And then he told there
that good man all his life, and how he had loved a queen unmeasurably,
and out of measure long;--and all my great deeds of arms that I have
done, I did the most part for the queen's sake, and for her sake would
I do battle were it right or wrong, and never did I battle all only for
God's sake, but for to win worship, and to cause me to be the better
beloved, and little or nought I thanked God of it. Then Sir Launcelot
said, I pray you counsel me. I will counsel you, said the hermit, if ye
will ensure me that ye will never come in that queen's fellowship, as
much as ye may forbear. And then Sir Launcelot promised him he would
not, by the faith of his body. Look that your heart and your mouth
accord, said the good man, and I shall ensure you ye shall have more
worship than ever ye had. Holy father, said Sir Launcelot, I marvel of
the voice that said to me marvellous words, as ye have heard
toforehand. Have ye no marvel, said the good man, thereof; for it
seemeth well God loveth you; for men may understand a stone is hard of
kind, and namely one more than another, and that is to understand by
thee Sir Launcelot, for thou wilt not leave thy sin for no goodness
that God hath sent thee, therefore thou art more than any stone, and
never wouldest thou be made soft nor by water nor by fire, and that is,
the heat of the Holy Ghost may not enter in thee. Now take heed; in all
the world men shall not find one knight to whom our Lord hath given so
much of grace as He hath given you: for He hath given you fairness with
seemliness: He hath given thee wit, discretion to know good from evil:
He hath given thee prowess and hardiness; and given thee to work so
largely that thou hast had at all days the better wheresoever thou
camest. And now our Lord will suffer thee no longer, but that thou
shalt know Him, whether thou wilt or nilt. And why the voice called
thee bitterer than wood, for where overmuch sin dwelleth, there may be
but little sweetness, wherefore thou art likened to an old rotten tree.
Now have I shewed thee why thou art harder than the stone, and bitterer
than the tree. Now shall I shew thee why thou art more naked and barer
than the fig-tree. It befell that our Lord on Palm-Sunday preached in
Jerusalem, and there He found in the people that all hardness was
harboured in them, and there He found in all the town not one that
would harbour Him. And then He went without the town, and found in the
midst of the way a fig-tree, the which was right fair and well
garnished of leaves, but fruit had it none. Then our Lord cursed the
tree that bare no fruit; that betokeneth the fig-tree unto Jerusalem,
that had leaves and no fruit. So thou, Sir Launcelot, when the holy
Graile was brought afore thee, He found in thee no fruit, nor good
thought nor good will, and defouled with lechery. Certes, said Sir
Launcelot, all that ye have said is true, and from henceforward I cast
me by the grace of God never to be so wicked as I have been, but as to
follow knighthood, and to do feats of arms. Then the good man enjoined
Sir Launcelot such penance as he might do, and to sue knighthood, and
so he assoiled him and prayed Sir Launcelot to abide with him all that
day. I will well, said Sir Launcelot, for I have neither helm, nor
horse, nor sword. As for that, said the good man, I shall help you or
to-morn at even of an horse, and all that longeth unto you. And then
Sir Launcelot repented him greatly.


End of the Thirteenth Book.
===========================
