The Seventeenth Book.
=====================

CHAPTER I.
----------

_How Sir Galahad fought at a tournament, and how he was known of Sir
Gawaine and Sir Ector de Maris._

Now saith this story, when Galahad had rescued Percivale from the
twenty knights, he rode then into a vast forest, wherein he rode many
journeys, and he found many adventures, the which he brought to an end,
whereof the story maketh here no mention. Then he took his way to the
sea on a day, and it befell as he passed by a castle where was a wonder
tournament, but they without had done so much that they within were put
to the worse, yet were they within good knights enough. When Galahad
saw that those within were at so great a mischief that men slew them at
the entry of the castle, then he thought to help them, and put a spear
forth, and smote the first that he fell to the earth, and the spear
brake to pieces. Then he drew his sword, and smote there as they were
thickest, and so he did wonderful deeds of arms, that all they
marvelled. Then it happed that Gawaine and Sir Ector de Maris were with
the knights without; but when they espied the white shield with the red
cross, the one said to the other, Yonder is the good knight Sir Galahad
the haut prince: now he should be a great fool which should meet with
him to fight. So by adventure he came by Sir Gawaine, and he smote him
so hard that he clave his helm, and the coif of iron unto his head, so
that Gawaine fell to the earth: but the stroke was so great, that it
slanted down to the earth, and carved the horse shoulder in two. When
Ector saw Gawaine down, he drew him aside, and thought it no wisdom for
to abide him, and also for natural love, that he was his uncle. Thus
through his great hardiness he beat aback all the knights without. And
then they within came out and chased them all about. But when Galahad
saw there would none turn again, he stole away privily, so that none
wist where he was become. Now by my head, said Gawaine to Ector, now
are the wonders true that were said of Launcelot du Lake, that the
sword which stuck in the stone should give me such a buffet that I
would not have it for the best castle in this world, and soothly now it
is proved true, for never before had I such a stroke of man's hand.
Sir, said Ector, me seemeth your quest is done. And yours is not done,
said Gawaine, but mine is done; I shall seek no further. Then Gawaine
was borne into a castle, and unarmed him, and laid him in a rich bed,
and a leech found that he might live, and to be whole within a month.
Thus Gawaine and Ector abode together. For Sir Ector would not away
till Gawaine were whole. And the good knight Galahad rode so long till
he came that night to the castle of Carboneck; and it befell him thus
that he was benighted in an hermitage. So the good man was fain when he
saw he was a knight errant. Then when they were at rest, there came a
gentlewoman knocking at the door, and called Galahad, and so the good
man came to the door to wit what she would. Then she called the hermit,
Sir Ulfin, I am a gentlewoman that would speak with the knight that is
with you. Then the good man awaked Galahad, and bad him arise, and
speak with a gentlewoman that seemeth hath great need of you. Then
Galahad went to her, and asked her what she would. Galahad, said she, I
will that ye arm you, and mount upon your horse, and follow me, for I
shall shew you within these three days the highest adventure that ever
any knight saw. Anon Galahad armed him, and took his horse and
commended him to God, and bad the gentlewoman go, and he would follow
there as she liked.


CHAPTER II.
-----------

_How Sir Galahad rode with a damsel, and came to the ship whereas Sir
Bors and Sir Percivale were in._

So she rode as fast as her palfrey might bear her, till that she came
to the sea the which was called Collibe. And at the night they came
unto a castle in a valley, was closed with a running water, and with
strong walls and high. And so she entered into the castle with Galahad,
and there had he great cheer, for the lady of that castle was the
damsel's lady. So when he was unarmed, then said the damsel, Madam,
shall we abide here all this day? Nay, said she, but till he hath
dined, and till he hath slept a little. So he eat and slept a while,
till that the maid called him, and armed him by torchlight. And when
the maid was horsed, and he both, the lady took Galahad a fair child
and rich, and so they departed from the castle, till they came to the
sea-side, and there they found the ship where Bors and Percivale were
in, the which cried on the ship's board, Sir Galahad, ye be welcome, we
have abiden you long. And when he heard them, he asked them what they
were. Sir, said she, leave your horse here, and I shall leave mine; and
took their saddles and their bridles with them, and made a cross on
them, and so entered into the ship. And the two knights received them
both with great joy, and every each knew other. And so the wind arose,
and drove them through the sea in a marvellous place. And within a
while it dawned. Then did Galahad off his helm and his sword, and asked
of his fellows from whence came that fair ship. Truly, said they, ye
wot as well as we, but of God's grace. And then they told every each to
other of all their hard adventures, and of their great temptation.
Truly, said Galahad, ye are much bounden to God, for ye have escaped
great adventures: and had not the gentlewoman been I had not come here;
for as for you, I wend never to have found you in these strange
countries. Ah, Galahad, said Bors, if Launcelot your father were here
then were we well at ease, for then me seemeth we failed nothing. That
may not be, said Galahad, but if it please our Lord. By then the ship
went from the land of Logris, and by adventure it arrived up betwixt
two rocks passing great and marvellous, but there they might not land,
for there was a swallow of the sea, save there was another ship, and
upon it they might go without danger. Go we thither, said the
gentlewoman, and there shall we see adventures, for so is our Lord's
will. And when they came thither, they found the ship rich enough, but
they found neither man nor woman therein. But they found in the end of
the ship two fair letters written, which said a dreadful word and a
marvellous:--Thou man which shall enter into this ship, beware thou be
in steadfast belief, for I am Faith; and therefore beware how thou
enterest, for and thou fail I shall not help thee. Then said the
gentlewoman, Percivale, wot ye what I am? Certes, said he, nay, to my
witting. Wit you well, said she, that I am thy sister, which am
daughter of king Pellinore. And therefore wit ye well ye are the man in
the world that I most love. And if ye be not in perfect belief of Jesu
Christ, enter not in no manner of wise, for then should ye perish in
the ship, for he is so perfect he will suffer no sin in him. When
Percivale understood that she was his very sister, he was inwardly
glad, and said, Fair sister, I shall enter therein, for if I be a
mis-creature, or an untrue knight, there shall I perish.


CHAPTER III.
------------

_How Sir Galahad entered into the ship, and of a fair bed therein, with
other marvellous things, and of a sword._

In the mean while Galahad blessed him and entered therein, and then
next the gentlewoman, and then Sir Bors and Sir Percivale. And when
they were therein, it was so marvellous fair and rich that they
marvelled. And in the midst of the ship was a fair bed, and Sir Galahad
went thereto, and found there a crown of silk. And at the feet was a
sword rich and fair, and it was drawn out of the sheath half a foot and
more, and the sword was of divers fashions, and the pommel was of
stone, and there was in him all manner of colours that any man might
find, and every each of the colours had divers virtues, and the scales
of the haft were of two ribs of divers beasts. The one beast was a
serpent, which was conversant in Calidone, and is called the serpent of
the fiend. And the bone of him is of such a virtue, that there is no
hand that handleth him shall never be weary nor hurt: and the other
beast is a fish, which is not right great, and haunteth the flood of
Eufrates; and that fish is called Ertanax, and his bones be of such a
manner of kind, that who that handleth them shall have so much will
that he shall never be weary, and he shall not think on joy nor sorrow
that he hath had, but only that thing that he beholdeth before him. And
as for this sword there shall never man begripe it at the handle but
one, but he shall pass all other. In the name of God, said Percivale, I
shall essay to handle it. So he set his hand to the sword, but he might
not begripe it. By my faith, said he, now have I failed. Bors set his
hand thereto and failed. Then Galahad beheld the sword, and saw the
letters like blood, that said, Let see who shall assay to draw me out
of my sheath, but if he be more hardier than other, and who that
draweth me, wit ye well that he shall never fail of shame of his body,
or to be wounded to the death. By my faith, said Galahad, I would draw
this sword out of the sheath, but the offending is so great, that I
shall not set my hand thereto. Now sir, said the gentlewoman, wit ye
well that the drawing of this sword is forbidden to all men, save all
only unto you. Also this ship arrived in the realm of Logris, and that
time was deadly war between king Labor, which was father unto the
maimed king, and king Hurlame, which was a Saracen. But then was he
newly christened, so that men held him afterwards one of the wittiest
men of the world. And so upon a day it befell that king Labor and king
Hurlame had assembled their folk upon the sea, where this ship was
arrived, and there king Hurlame was discomfit, and his men slain, and
he was afeard to be dead, and fled to his ship, and there found this
sword, and drew it, and came out and found king Labor, the man in the
world of all Christendom in whom was then the greatest faith. And when
king Hurlame saw king Labor, he dressed this sword, and smote him upon
the helm so hard, that he clave him and his horse to the earth with the
first stroke of his sword. And it was in the realm of Logris; and so
befell great pestilence and great harm to both realms. For sithen
increased neither corn nor grass, nor well nigh no fruit, nor in the
water was no fish, wherefore men call it the lands of the two marches,
the waste land, for that dolorous stroke. And when king Hurlame saw
this sword so carving, he turned again to fetch the scabbard: and so
came into this ship, and entered, and put up the sword in the sheath.
And as soon as he had done it, he fell down dead afore the bed. Thus
was the sword proved, that none ne drew it but he were dead or maimed.
So lay he there till a maiden came into the ship, and cast him out, for
there was no man so hardy of the world to enter into that ship for the
defence.


CHAPTER IV.
-----------

_Of the marvels of the sword and of the scabbard._

And then beheld they the scabbard; it seemed to be of a serpent's skin.
And thereon were letters of gold and silver. And the girdle was but
poorly to come to, and not able to sustain such a rich sword, and the
letters said: He which shall wield me, ought to be more harder than any
other, if he bear me as truly as I ought to be borne. For the body of
him which I ought to hang by, he shall not be shamed in no place while
he is gird with this girdle, nor never none be so hardy to do away this
girdle for it ought not to be done away, but by the hands of a maid,
and that she be a king's daughter, and queen's, and she must be a maid
all the days of her life, both in will and in deed; and if she break
her virginity, she shall die the most villainous death that ever did
any woman. Sir, said Percivale, turn this sword, that we may see what
is on the other side. And it was red as blood, with black letters as
any coal, which said, He that shall praise me most, most shall he find
me to blame at a great need, and to whom I should be most debonair
shall I be most felon, and that shall be at one time. Fair brother,
said she to Percivale, it befell about a forty year after the passion
of Jesu Christ, that Nacien, the brother-in-law of king Mordrains, was
borne into a town more than fourteen days' journey from his country, by
the commandment of our Lord, into an isle, into the parts of the west,
that men call the Isle of Turnance. So befell it that he found this
ship at the entry of a rock, and he found the bed, and this sword, as
we have heard now. Not for then he had not so much hardiness to draw
it: and there he dwelled an eight days, and at the ninth day there fell
a great wind which departed him out of the isle, and brought him to
another isle by a rock, and there he found the greatest giant that ever
man might see. Therewith came that horrible giant to slay him, and then
he looked about him, and might not fly, and he had nothing to defend
him with. So he ran to his sword, and when he saw it naked he praised
it much, and then he shook it, and therewith he brake it in the midst.
Ah, said Nacien, the thing I most praised ought I now most to blame.
And therewith he threw the pieces of his sword over his bed. And after
he lept over the board to fight with the giant, and slew him. And anon
he entered into the ship again, and the wind arose, and drove him
through the sea, that by adventure he came to another ship where king
Mordrains was, which had been tempted full evil with a fiend in the
port of perilous rock. And when that one saw the other they made great
joy of other, and either told other of their adventure, and how the
sword failed him at his most need. When Mordrains saw the sword he
praised it much,--but the breaking was not to do but by wickedness of
thyselfward, for thou art in some sin:--and there he took the sword,
and set the pieces together, and they soldered as fair as ever they
were tofore; and there he put the sword in the sheath, and laid it down
on the bed. Then heard they a voice that said, Go out of this ship a
little while, and enter into the other, for dread ye fall in deadly
sin; for, and ye be found in deadly sin, ye may not escape but perish.
And so they went into the other ship. And as Nacien went over the
board, he was smitten with a sword on the right foot, that he fell down
noseling to the ship's board, and therewith he said, O God, how am I
hurt. And then there came a voice and said, Take thou that for thy
forfeit that thou didst in drawing of this sword, therefore thou
receivest a wound, for thou were never worthy to handle it, as the
writing maketh mention. In the name of God, said Galahad, ye are right
wise of these works.


CHAPTER V.
----------

_How king Pelles was smitten through both thighs because he drew the
sword, and other marvellous histories._

Sir, said she, there was a king that hight Pelles the maimed king. And
while he might ride, he supported much Christendom, and holy Church. So
upon a day he hunted in a wood of his which lasted unto the sea, and at
the last he lost his hounds and his knights, save only one: and there
he and his knight went till that they came toward Ireland, and there he
found the ship. And when he saw the letters and understood them, yet he
entered, for he was right perfect of his life: but his knight had none
hardiness to enter, and there found he this sword, and drew it out as
much as ye may see. So therewith entered a spear, wherewith he was
smitten him through both the thighs, and never sith might he be healed,
nor nought shall tofore we come to him. Thus, said she, was king
Pelles, your grandsire, maimed for his hardiness. In the name of God,
damsel, said Galahad. So they went toward the bed to behold all about
it, and above the head there hung two swords. Also there were two
spindles which were as white as any snow, and other that were as red as
blood, and other above green as any emerald: of these three colours
were the spindles, and of natural colour within, and without any
painting. These spindles, said the damsel, were when sinful Eve came to
gather fruit, for which Adam and she were put out of paradise, she took
with her the bough on which the apple hung on. Then perceived she that
the branch was fair and green, and she remembered her the loss which
came from the tree. Then she thought to keep the branch as long as she
might. And for she had no coffer to keep it in, she put it in the
earth. So by the will of our Lord the branch grew to a great tree
within a little while, and was as white as any snow, branches, boughs,
and leaves, that was a token a maiden planted it. But after the tree
which was white became green as any grass, and all that came out of it.
And in the same time there was Abel begotten; thus was the tree long of
green colour. And so it befell many days after, under the same tree
Cain slew Abel, whereof befell great marvel. For anon as Abel had
received the death under the green tree, it lost the green colour and
became red, and that was in tokening of the blood. And anon all the
plants died thereof, but the tree grew and waxed marvellously fair, and
it was the fairest tree and the most delectable that any man might
behold and see, and so died the plants that grew out of it tofore the
time that Abel was slain under it. So long endured the tree till that
Solomon king David's son reigned, and held the land after his father.
This Solomon was wise, and knew all the virtues of stones and trees,
and so he knew the course of the stars, and many other diverse things.

This Solomon had an evil wife, where through he wend that there had
never been no good woman, and so he despised them in his books. So
answered a voice him once, Solomon, if heaviness come to a man by a
woman, ne reck thou never. For yet shall there come a woman whereof
there shall come greater joy unto man an hundred times more than this
heaviness giveth sorrow, and that woman shall be born of thy lineage.
Then when Solomon heard these words, he held himself but a fool, and
the truth he perceived by old books. Also the Holy Ghost shewed him the
coming of the glorious Virgin Mary. Then asked he of the voice if it
should be in the end of his lineage. Nay, said the voice, but there
shall come a man which shall be a maid, and the last of your blood, and
he shall be as good a knight as duke Josua thy brother-in-law.


CHAPTER VI.
-----------

_How Solomon took David's sword by the counsel of his wife, and of
other matters marvellous._

Now have I certified thee of that thou stoodst in doubt. Then was
Solomon glad that there should come any such of his lineage, but ever
he marvelled and studied who that should be, and what his name might
be. His wife perceived that he studied, and thought that she would know
it at some season, and so she waited her time, and asked of him the
cause of his studying, and there he told her altogether how the voice
told him. Well, said she, I shall let make a ship of the best wood and
most durable that men may find. So Solomon sent for all the carpenters
of the land and the best. And when they had made the ship, the lady
said to Solomon, Sir, said she, since it is so that this knight ought
to pass all other knights of chivalry which have been tofore him, and
shall come after him, moreover I shall tell you, said she, ye shall go
into our Lord's temple, whereas is king David's sword, your father, the
which is the marvellousest and sharpest that ever was taken in any
knight's hand. Therefore take that, and take off the pommel, and
thereto make ye a pommel of precious stones, that it be so subtilly
made that no man perceive it but that they be all one. And after make
there an hilt so marvellously and wonderly that no man may know it. And
after make a marvellous sheath. And when ye have made all this, I shall
let make a girdle thereto, such as shall please me. All this king
Solomon did let make as she devised, both the ship and all the remnant.
And when the ship was ready in the sea to sail, the lady let make a
great bed, and marvellous rich, and set her upon the bed's head covered
with silk, and laid the sword at the feet, and the girdles were of
hemp, and therewith the king was angry. Sir, wit ye well, said she,
that I have none so high a thing which were worthy to sustain so high a
sword, and a maid shall bring other knights thereto, but I wot not when
it shall be, nor what time. And there she let make a covering to the
ship, of cloth of silk that should never rot for no manner of weather.
Yet went that lady, and made a carpenter to come to the tree which Abel
was slain under. Now, said she, carve me out of this tree as much wood
as will make me a spindle. Ah, madam, said he, this is the tree the
which our first mother planted. Do it, said she, or else I shall
destroy thee. Anon as he began to work there came out drops of blood,
and then would he have left, but she would not suffer him, and so he
took away as much wood as might make a spindle, and so she made him to
take as much of the green tree, and of the white tree. And when these
three spindles were shapen, she made them to be fastened upon the
ceiling of the bed. When Solomon saw this, he said to his wife, Ye have
done marvellously, for though all the world were here right now, they
could not devise wherefore all this was made, but our Lord himself, and
thou that hast done it wotest not what it shall betoken. Now let it be,
said she, for ye shall hear tidings sooner than ye ween.

Now shall ye hear a wonderful tale of king Solomon and his wife.


CHAPTER VII.
------------

_A wonderful tale of king Solomon and his wife._

That night lay Solomon before the ship with little fellowship. And when
he was on sleep, him thought there came from heaven a great company of
angels, and alight into the ship, and took water which was brought by
an angel in a vessel of silver, and sprinkled all the ship. And after
he came to the sword and drew letters on the hilt. And after went to
the ship's board, and wrote there other letters, which said: Thou man
that wilt enter within me, beware that thou be full within the faith,
for I ne am but faith and belief. When Solomon espied these letters he
was abashed, so that he durst not enter, and so drew him aback, and the
ship was anon shoven in the sea, and he went so fast that he lost sight
of him within a little while. And then a little voice said, Solomon,
the last knight of thy lineage shall rest in this bed. Then went
Solomon and awaked his wife, and told her of the adventures of the ship.

Now saith the history, that a great while the three fellows beheld the
bed and the three spindles. Then they were at certain that they were of
natural colours, without painting. Then they lift up a cloth which was
above the ground, and there they found a rich purse by seeming. And
Percivale took it, and found therein a writ, and so he read it, and
devised the manner of the spindles, and of the ship, whence it came,
and by whom it was made. Now, said Galahad, where shall we find the
gentlewoman that shall make new girdles to the sword. Fair sir, said
Percivale's sister, dismay you not, for by the leave of God I shall let
make a girdle to the sword, such one as shall belong thereto. And then
she opened a box, and took out girdles which were seemly wrought with
golden threads, and upon that were set full precious stones, and a rich
buckle of gold. Lo lords, said she, here is a girdle that ought to be
set about the sword. And wit ye well the greatest part of this girdle
was made of my hair, which I loved well while that I was a woman of the
world. But as soon as I wist that this adventure was ordained me, I
clipped off my hair and made this girdle in the name of God. Ye be well
found, said Sir Bors, for certes you have put us out of great pain,
wherein we should have entered ne had your tidings been. Then went the
gentlewoman and set it on the girdle of the sword. Now, said the
fellowship, what is the name of the sword, and what shall we call it?
Truly, said she, the name of the sword is, the sword with the strange
girdles, and the sheath, mover of blood; for no man that hath blood in
him shall never see the one part of the sheath which was made of the
tree of life. Then they said to Galahad, In the name of Jesu Christ,
and pray you that ye gird you with this sword, which hath been desired
so much in the realm of Logris. Now let me begin, said Galahad, to
gripe this sword for to give you courage: but wit ye well it belongeth
no more to me then it doth to you. And then he griped about it with his
fingers a great deal. And then she girt him about the middle with the
sword:--Now reck I not though I die, for now I hold me one of the
blessed maidens of the world, which hath made the worthiest knight of
the world. Damsel, said Galahad, ye have done so much that I shall be
your knight all the days of my life. Then they went from that ship, and
went to the other. And anon the wind drove them into the sea a great
pace, but they had no victual: but it befell that they came on the morn
to a castle that men call Carteloise, that was in the marches of
Scotland. And when they had passed the port, the gentlewoman said,
Lords, here be men arriven that, and they wist that ye were of king
Arthur's court, ye should be assailed anon. Damsel, said Galahad, he
that cast us out of the rock shall deliver us from them.


CHAPTER VIII.
-------------

_How Galahad and his fellows came to a castle, and how they were fought
withal, and how they slew their adversaries, and other matters._

So it befell, as they spake thus there came a squire by them, and asked
what they were. And they said they were of king Arthur's house. Is that
sooth? said he. Now by my head, said he, ye be ill arrayed; and then
turned he again unto the cliff fortress. And within a while they heard
a horn blow. Then a gentlewoman came to them, and asked them of whence
they were, and they told her. Fair lords, said she, for God's love turn
again if ye may, for ye be come unto your death. Nay, they said, we
will not turn again, for He shall help us in whose service we be
entered in. Then as they stood talking, there came knights well armed,
and bad them yield them, or else to die. That yielding, said they,
shall be noyous to you; and therewith they let their horses run, and
Sir Percivale smote the foremost to the earth, and took his horse and
mounted thereupon, and the same did Galahad. Also Sir Bors served
another so. For they had no horses in that country, for they left their
horses when they took their ship in other countries. And so when they
were horsed then began they to set upon them. And they of the castle
fled into the strong fortress, and the three knights after them, into
the castle, and so alight on foot, and with their swords slew them
down, and gat into the hall. Then when they beheld the great multitude
of people they had slain, they held themselves great sinners. Certes,
said Bors, I ween and God had loved them that we should not have had
power to have slain them thus but they have done so much against our
Lord that he will not suffer them to reign no longer. Say ye not so,
said Galahad, for if they misdid against God the vengeance is not ours,
but to Him which hath power thereof. So came there out of a chamber a
good man which was a priest, and bear God's body in a cup. And when he
saw them which lay dead in the hall, he was all abashed. And Galahad
did off his helm and kneeled down, and so did his two fellows. Sir,
said they, have ye no dread of us, for we be of king Arthur's court.
Then asked the good man how they were slain so suddenly; and they told
it him. Truly, said the good man, and ye might live as long as the
world might endure, never might ye have done so great an alms-deed as
this. Sir, said Galahad, I repent me much, inasmuch as they were
christened. Nay, repent you not, said he, for they were not christened,
and I shall tell you how that I wot of this castle. Here was lord earl
Hernox not but one year, and he had three sons good knights of arms,
and a daughter the fairest gentlewoman that men knew. So those three
knights loved their sister so sore that they burnt in love, and so they
dishonoured her, maugre her head. And for she cried to her father, they
slew her, and took their father and put him in prison, and wounded him
nigh to the death, but a cousin of hers rescued him. And then did they
great untruth: they slew clerks and priests, and made beat down
chapels, that our Lord's service might not be served nor said; and this
same day their father sent to me for to be confessed and houseled, but
such shame had never man as I had this day with the three brethren: but
the earl bad me suffer, for he said they should not long endure, for
three servants of our Lord should destroy them: and now it is brought
to an end. And by this ye may wit that our Lord is not displeased with
your deeds. Certes, said Galahad, and it had not pleased our Lord,
never should we have slain so many men in so little a while. And then
they brought the earl Hernox out of prison into the midst of the hall,
that knew Galahad anon, and yet he saw him never afore but by
revelation of our Lord.


CHAPTER IX.
-----------

_How the three knights, with Percivale's sister, came into the waste
forest, and of an hart and four lions and other things._

Then began he to weep right tenderly, and said, Long have I abiden your
coming, but for God's love hold me in your arms, that my soul may
depart out of my body in so good a man's arms as ye be. Gladly, said
Galahad. And then one said on high that all heard, Galahad, well hast
thou avenged me on God's enemies. Now behoveth thee to go to the maimed
king as soon as thou mayest, for he shall receive by thee health which
he hath abiden so long. And therewith the soul departed from the body.
And Galahad made him to be buried as he ought to be.

Right so departed the three knights, and Percivale's sister with them.
And so they came into a waste forest, and there they saw afore them a
white hart, which four lions led. Then they took them to assent for to
follow after, for to know whither they repaired; and so they rode
after, a great pace, till that they came to a valley, and thereby was
an hermitage where a good man dwelled; and the hart and the lions
entered also. So when they saw all this, they turned to the chapel, and
saw the good man in a religious weed, and in the armour of our Lord,
for he would sing mass of the Holy Ghost, and so they entered in and
heard mass. And at the secrets of the mass, they three saw the hart
become a man, the which marvelled them, and set him upon the altar in a
rich siege, and saw the four lions were changed, the one to the form of
a man, the other to the form of a lion, and the third to an eagle, and
the fourth was changed unto an ox. Then took they their siege where the
hart sat, and went out through a glass window, and there was nothing
perished nor broken, and they heard a voice say, In such a manner
entered the son of God in the womb of a maid, Mary. And when they heard
these words, they fell down to the earth, and were astonied, and
therewith was a great clearness. And when they were come to themselves
again, they went to the good man, and prayed him that he would say them
truth. What thing have ye seen? said he: and they told him all that
they had seen. Ah, lords, said he, ye be welcome, now wot I well ye be
the good knights the which shall bring the Sancgreal to an end; for ye
be they unto whom our Lord shall shew great secrets. And well ought our
Lord be signified to an hart; for the hart when he is old he waxeth
young again in his white skin: right so cometh again our Lord from
death to life, for he lost earthly flesh, that was the deadly flesh
which he had taken in the womb of the blessed virgin Mary; and for that
cause appeared our Lord as a while hart without spot. And the four that
were with him is to understand the four evangelists, which set in
writing a part of Jesu Christ's deeds that he did some time when he was
among you an earthly man. For wit ye well never erst might no knight
know the truth, for, ofttimes or this, our Lord shewed him unto good
men and unto good knights in likeness of an hart. But I suppose from
henceforth ye shall see no more. And then they joyed much, and dwelled
there all that day. And upon the morrow, when they had heard mass they
departed, and commended the good man to God. And so they came to a
castle, and passed by. So there came a knight armed after them, and
said, Lords, hark what I shall say to you.


CHAPTER X.
----------

_How they were desired of a strange custom, the which they would not
obey; and how they fought and slew many knights._

This gentlewoman that ye lead with you is a maid? Sir, said she, a maid
I am. Then he took her by the bridle and said, By the holy cross ye
shall not escape me tofore ye have yielden the custom of this castle.
Let her go, said Percivale; ye be not wise, for a maid in what place
she cometh is free. So in the meanwhile there came out a ten or twelve
knights armed, out of the castle, and with them came gentlewomen which
held a dish of silver, and then they said, This gentlewoman must yield
us the custom of this castle. Sir, said a knight, what maid passeth
hereby shall give this dish full of blood of her right arm. Blame have
ye, said Galahad, that brought up such customs, and I ensure you of
this gentlewoman ye shall fail while that I live. Truly, said Sir
Percivale, I had lever be slain. And I also, said Sir Bors. By my
truth, said the knight, then shall ye die, for ye may not endure
against us, though ye were the best knights of the world. Then let them
run each to other, and the three fellows beat the ten knights, and then
set their hands to their swords, and beat them down and slew them. Then
there came out of the castle well a threescore knights armed. Fair
lords, said the three fellows, have mercy upon yourselves, and have not
ado with us. Nay, fair lords, said the knights of the castle, we
counsel you to withdraw you, for ye are the best knights of the world,
and therefore do no more, for ye have done enough. We will let you go
with this harm, but we must needs have the custom. Certes, said
Galahad, for nought speak ye. Well, said they, will ye die? We be not
yet come thereto, said Galahad. Then began they to meddle together, and
Galahad drew his sword with the strange girdles, and smote on the right
hand and on the left hand, and slew what that ever abode him, and did
such marvels that there was none that saw him but they wend he had been
none earthly man but a monster. And his two fellows halp him passing
well, and so they held the journey every each in like hard, till it was
night. Then must they needs part. So came a good knight and said to the
three fellows, If ye will come in to night, and take such harbour as
here is, ye shall be right welcome, and we shall ensure you by the
faith of our bodies, as we are true knights, to leave you in such
estate to-morrow as we find you, without any falsehood. And as soon as
ye know of the custom we dare say ye will accord. Therefore, for God's
love, said the gentlewoman, go thither, and spare not for me. Go we,
said Galahad, and so they entered into the castle. And when they were
alight, they made great joy of them. So within a while the three
knights asked the custom of the castle, and wherefore it was. What it
is, said they, we will say you sooth.


CHAPTER XI.
-----------

_How Sir Percivale's sister bled a dish full of blood for to heal a
lady; wherefore she died; and how that the body was put in a ship._

There is in this castle a gentlewoman which we and this castle is hers,
and many other. So it befell many years agone there fell upon her a
malady. And when she had lain a great while, she fell into a measle,
and of no leech she could have no remedy. But at the last an old man
said, and she might have a dish full of blood of a maid and a clean
virgin in will and in work, and a king's daughter, that blood should be
her health, and for to anoint her withal: and for this thing was this
custom made. Now, said Percivale's sister, Fair knights, I see well
that this gentlewoman is but dead. Certes, said Galahad, and if ye
bleed so much, ye may die. Truly, said she, and I die for to heal her,
I shall get me great worship and soul's health, and worship to my
lineage, and better is one harm than twain. And therefore there shall
be no more battle, but to-morn I shall yield you your custom of this
castle. And then there was great joy, more than there was tofore. For
else had there been mortal war upon the morn; notwithstanding she would
none other, whether they would or nold. That night were the three
fellows eased with the best, and on the morn they heard mass, and Sir
Percivale's sister bad bring forth the sick lady. So she was, the which
was evil at ease. Then said she, Who shall let me blood? So one came
forth and let her blood, and she bled so much that the dish was full.
Then she lift up her hand and blessed her. And then she said to the
lady, Madam, I am come to the death, for to make you whole; for God's
love pray for me. With that she fell in a swoon. Then Galahad and his
two fellows start up to her, and lift her up, and stanched her, but she
had bled so much that she might not live. Then she said, when she was
awaked, Fair brother Percivale, I die for the healing of this lady. So
I require you that ye bury not me in this country, but as soon as I am
dead put me in a boat at the next haven, and let me go as adventure
will lead me; and as soon as ye three come to the city of Sarras, there
to achieve the holy Graile, ye shall find me under a tower arrived, and
there bury me in the spiritual place, for I say you so much, there
Galahad shall be buried, and ye also, in the same place. Then Percivale
understood these words, and granted it her, weeping. And then said a
voice, Lords and fellows, to-morrow at the hour of prime ye three shall
depart every each from other, till the adventure bring you to the
maimed king. Then asked she her Saviour, and as soon as she had
received him the soul departed from the body. So the same day was the
lady healed, when she was anointed withal. Then Sir Percivale made a
letter of all that she had holpen them as in strange adventures, and
put it in her right hand, and so laid her in a barge, and covered it
with black silk; and so the wind arose, and drove the barge from the
land, and all knights beheld it, till it was out of their sight.

Then they drew all to the castle, and so forthwith there fell a sudden
tempest, and a thunder, lightning, and rain, as all the earth would
have broken. So half the castle turned up so down. So it passed
evensong or the tempest was ceased. Then they saw afore them a knight
armed and wounded hard in the body and in the head, that said, Oh God,
succour me, for now it is need! After this knight came another knight
and a dwarf which cried to them afar, Stand, ye may not escape. Then
the wounded knight held up his hands to God, that he should not die in
such tribulation. Truly, said Galahad, I shall succour him for His sake
that he calleth upon. Sir, said Bors, I shall do it, for it is not for
you, for he is but one knight. Sir, said he, I grant. So Sir Bors took
his horse, and commended him to God, and rode after to rescue the
wounded knight.

Now turn we to the two fellows.


CHAPTER XII.
------------

_How Galahad and Percivale found in a castle many tombs of maidens that
had bled to death._

Now saith the story that all night Galahad and Percivale were in a
chapel in their prayers, for to save Sir Bors. So on the morrow they
dressed them in their harness toward the castle, to wit what was fallen
of them therein. And when they came there, they found neither man nor
woman that he ne was dead by the vengeance of our Lord. With that they
heard a voice that said, This vengeance is for blood shedding of
maidens. Also they found at the end of the chapel a churchyard, and
therein might they see a threescore fair tombs, and that place was so
fair and so delectable that it seemed them there had been none tempest.
For there lay the bodies of all the good maidens which were martyred
for the sick lady's sake. Also they found the names of every each, and
of what blood they were come, and all were of kings' blood, and twelve
of them were kings' daughters. Then they departed, and went into a
forest. Now, said Percivale unto Galahad, we must depart; so pray we
our Lord that we may meet together in short time. Then they did off
their helms, and kissed together, and wept at their departing.


CHAPTER XIII.
-------------

_How Sir Launcelot entered into the ship where Sir Percivale's sister
lay dead; and how he met with Sir Galahad his son._

Now saith the history, that when Launcelot was come to the water of
Mortoise, as it is rehearsed before, he was in great peril, and so he
laid him down and slept, and took the adventure that God would send him.

So when he was asleep, there came a vision unto him and said,
Launcelot, arise up, and take thine armour, and enter into the first
ship that thou shalt find. And when he had heard these words, he start
up and saw great clearness about him. And then he lift up his hand and
blessed him, and so took his arms, and made him ready; and so by
adventure he came by a strand, and found a ship, the which was without
sail or oar. And as soon as he was within the ship, there he felt the
most sweetness that ever he felt; and he was fulfilled with all thing
that he thought on or desired. Then said he, Fair sweet Father Jesu
Christ, I wot not in what joy I am, for this joy passeth all earthly
joys that ever I was in. And so in this joy he laid him down to the
ship's board, and slept till day. And when he awoke, he found there a
fair bed, and therein lying a gentlewoman dead, the which was Sir
Percivale's sister. And as Launcelot devised her, he espied in her
right hand a writ, the which he read, the which told him all the
adventures that ye have heard tofore, and of what lineage she was come.
So with this gentlewoman Sir Launcelot was a month and more. If ye
would ask how he lived, He that fed the people of Israel with manna in
the desert, so was he fed. For every day, when he had said his prayers,
he was sustained with the grace of the Holy Ghost. So on a night he
went to play him by the water side, for he was somewhat weary of the
ship. And then he listened, and heard an horse come, and one riding
upon him. And when he came nigh he seemed a knight. And so he let him
pass, and went there as the ship was, and there he alight, and took the
saddle and the bridle and put the horse from him, and went into the
ship. And then Launcelot dressed unto him and said, Ye be welcome. And
he answered and saluted him again, and asked him, What is your name?
for much my heart giveth unto you. Truly, said he, my name is Launcelot
du Lake. Sir, said he, then be ye welcome, for ye were the beginner of
me in this world. Ah, said he, are ye Galahad? Yea forsooth, said he.
And so he kneeled down and asked him his blessing, and after took off
his helm and kissed him. And there was great joy between them, for
there is no tongue can tell the joy that they made either of other, and
many a friendly word spoken between, as kind would, the which is no
need here to be rehearsed. And there every each told other of their
adventures and marvels that were befallen to them in many journeys,
sith that they departed from the court. Anon as Galahad saw the
gentlewoman dead in the bed, he knew her well enough, and told great
worship of her, and that she was the best maid living, and it was great
pity of her death. But when Launcelot heard how the marvellous sword
was gotten, and who made it, and all the marvels rehearsed afore, then
he prayed Galahad his son that he would shew him the sword, and so he
did. And anon he kissed the pommel, and the hilts, and the scabbard.
Truly, said Launcelot, never erst knew I of so high adventures done,
and so marvellous and strange. So dwelled Launcelot and Galahad within
that ship half a year, and served God daily and nightly with all their
power. And often they arrived in isles far from folk, where there
repaired none but wild beasts; and there they found many strange
adventures and perilous, which they brought to an end. But because the
adventures were with wild beasts, and not in the quest of the
Sancgreal, therefore the tale maketh here no mention thereof, for it
would be too long to tell of all those adventures that befell them.


CHAPTER XIV.
------------

_How a knight brought unto Sir Galahad an horse, and bad him come from
his father Sir Launcelot._

So after, on a Monday, it befell that they arrived in the edge of a
forest, tofore a cross, and then saw they a knight, armed all in white,
and was richly horsed, and led in his right hand a white horse. And so
he came to the ship, and saluted the two knights on the high Lord's
behalf, and said, Galahad, sir, ye have been long enough with your
father, come out of the ship, and start upon this horse, and go where
the adventures shall lead thee in the quest of the Sancgreal. Then he
went to his father, and kissed him sweetly, and said, Fair sweet
father, I wot not when I shall see you more, till I see the body of
Jesu Christ. I pray you, said Launcelot, pray ye to the high Father
that He hold me in his service. And so he took his horse; and there
they heard a voice, that said, Think for to do well, for the one shall
never see the other before the dreadful day of doom. Now, son Galahad,
said Launcelot, since we shall depart, and never see other, I pray to
the high Father to preserve both me and you both. Sir, said Galahad, no
prayer availeth so much as yours. And therewith Galahad entered into
the forest. And the wind arose, and drove Launcelot more than a month
throughout the sea, where he slept but little, but prayed to God that
he might see some tidings of the Sancgreal. So it befell on a night, at
midnight he arrived afore a castle, on the back side, which was rich
and fair. And there was a postern opened towards the sea, and was open
without any keeping, save two lions kept the entry; and the moon shone
clear. Anon Sir Launcelot heard a voice that said, Launcelot, go out of
this ship, and enter into the castle, where thou shalt see a great part
of thy desire. Then he ran to his arms, and so armed him, and so he
went to the gate, and saw the lions. Then set he hand to his sword, and
drew it. Then there came a dwarf suddenly, and smote him on the arm so
sore that the sword fell out of his hand. Then heard he a voice say, Oh
man of evil faith and poor belief, wherefore trowest thou more on thy
harness than in thy Maker? for He might more avail thee than thine
armour, in whose service thou art set. Then said Launcelot, Fair Father
Jesu Christ, I thank thee of thy great mercy, that thou reprovest me of
my misdeed. Now see I well that ye hold me for your servant. Then took
he again his sword, and put it up in his sheath, and made a cross in
his forehead, and came to the lions, and they made semblant to do him
harm. Notwithstanding he passed by them without hurt, and entered into
the castle to the chief fortress, and there were they all at rest. Then
Launcelot entered in so armed, for he found no gate nor door but it was
open. And at the last he found a chamber whereof the door was shut, and
he set his hand thereto to have opened it, but he might not.


CHAPTER XV.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot was tofore the door of the chamber wherein the holy
Sancgreal was._

Then he enforced him mickle to undo the door. Then he listened, and
heard a voice which sang so sweetly that it seemed none earthly thing;
and him thought the voice said, Joy and honour be to the Father of
Heaven! Then Launcelot kneeled down tofore the chamber, for well wist
he that there was the Sancgreal within that chamber. Then said he, Fair
sweet Father Jesu Christ, if ever I did thing that pleased the Lord,
for thy pity have me not in despite for my sins done aforetime, and
that thou shew me something of that I seek! And with that he saw the
chamber door open, and there came out a great clearness, that the house
was as bright as all the torches of the world had been there. So came
he to the chamber door, and would have entered. And anon a voice said
to him, Flee Launcelot, and enter not, for thou oughtest not to do it:
and if thou enter thou shalt forthink it. Then he withdrew him aback
right heavy. Then looked he up in the midst of the chamber, and saw a
table of silver, and the holy vessel covered with red samite, and many
angels about it, whereof one held a candle of wax burning, and the
other held a cross, and the ornaments of an altar. And before the holy
vessel he saw a good man clothed as a priest, and it seemed that he was
at the sacring of the mass. And it seemed to Launcelot that above the
priest's hands there were three men, whereof the two put the youngest
by likeness between the priest's hands, and so he lift it up right
high, and it seemed to shew so to the people. And then Launcelot
marvelled not a little, for him thought that the priest was so greatly
charged of the figure, that him seemed that he should fall to the
earth. And when he saw none about him that would help him, then came he
to the door a great pace, and said, Fair Father Jesu Christ, ne take it
for no sin though I help the good man, which hath great need of help.
Right so entered he into the chamber, and came toward the table of
silver; and when he came nigh he felt a breath that him thought it was
intermeddled with fire, which smote him so sore in the visage that him
thought it burnt his visage; and therewith he fell to the earth, and
had no power to arise, as he that was so araged that had lost the power
of his body, and his hearing, and his saying. Then felt he many hands
about him, which took him up and bare him out of the chamber door,
without any amending of his swoon, and left him there seeming dead to
all people. So upon the morrow, when it was fair day, they within were
arisen, and found Launcelot lying afore the chamber door. All they
marvelled how that he came in. And so they looked upon him, and felt
his pulse, to wit whether there were any life in him; and so they found
life in him, but he might neither stand, nor stir no member that he
had; and so they took him by every part of the body, and bare him into
a chamber, and laid him in a rich bed, far from all folk, and so he lay
four days. Then the one said he was on live, and the other said nay. In
the name of God, said an old man, for I do you verily to wit he is not
dead, but he is so full of life as the mightiest of you all, and
therefore I counsel you that he be well kept till God send him life
again.


CHAPTER XVI.
------------

_How Sir Launcelot had lain fourteen days and as many nights as a dead
man, and other divers matters._

In such manner they kept Launcelot four and twenty days, and also many
nights, that ever he lay still as a dead man; and at the twenty-fifth
day befell him after midday that he opened his eyes. And when he saw
folk he made great sorrow and said, Why have ye awaked me? for I was
more at ease than I am now. Oh Jesu Christ, who might be so blessed
that might see openly thy great marvels of secretness there where no
sinner may be. What have ye seen? said they about him. I have seen,
said he, so great marvels that no tongue may tell, and more than any
heart can think, and had not my son been here afore me I had seen much
more. Then they told him how he had lain there four and twenty days and
nights. Then him thought it was punishment for the twenty-four years
that he had been a sinner, wherefore our Lord put him in penance four
and twenty days and nights. Then looked Sir Launcelot before him, and
saw the hair which he had borne nigh a year, for that he forethought
him right much that he had broken his promise unto the hermit, which he
had avowed to do. Then they asked him how it stood with him. Forsooth,
said he, I am whole of body, thanked be our Lord; therefore, sirs, for
God's love tell me where that I am? Then said they all that he was in
the castle of Carbonek. Therewith came a gentlewoman, and brought him a
shirt of small linen cloth, but he changed not there, but took the hair
to him again. Sir, said they, the quest of the Sancgreal is achieved
right now in you, that never shall ye see of the Sancgreal no more than
ye have seen. Now I thank God, said Launcelot, of His great mercy, of
that I have seen, for it sufficeth me, for, as I suppose, no man in
this world hath lived better than I have done to achieve that I have
done. And therewith he took the hair, and clothed him in it, and above
that he put a linen shirt, and after a robe of scarlet, fresh and new.
And when he was so arrayed, they marvelled all, for they knew him that
he was Launcelot, the good knight. And then they said all, O my lord
Sir Launcelot, be that ye? And he said, Truly I am he. Then came word
to king Pelles, that the knight that had lain so long dead was Sir
Launcelot; then was the king right glad, and went to see him. And when
Launcelot saw him come, he dressed him against him, and there made the
king great joy of him. And there the king told him tidings, that his
fair daughter was dead. Then Launcelot was right heavy of it, and said,
Sir, me forthinketh the death of your daughter, for she was a full fair
lady, fresh and young. And well I wot she bare the best knight that is
now on earth, or that ever was since God was born. So the king held him
there four days. And on the morrow he took his leave at king Pelles,
and at all the fellowship that were there, and thanked them of the
great labour. Right so as they sat at dinner in the chief hall, then
was it so befallen that the Sancgreal had fulfilled the tables with all
manner of meats that any heart might think. So as they sat, they saw
all the doors and windows of the place were shut without man's hand,
whereof they were all abashed, and none wist what to do. And then it
happed suddenly a knight came to the chief door, and knocked, and
cried, Undo the door; but they would not. And ever he cried, Undo, but
they would not. And at the last it annoyed them so much, that the king
himself arose, and came to a window where the knight called. Then he
said, Sir knight, ye shall not enter at this time, while the Sancgreal
is here, and therefore go into another. For certes ye be none of the
knights of the quest, but one of them which hath served the fiend, and
hast left the service of our Lord. And he was passing wroth at the
king's words. Sir knight, said the king, sin ye would so fain enter,
say me of what country ye be? Sir, said he, I am of the realm of
Logris, and my name is Ector de Maris, and brother unto my lord Sir
Launcelot. Truly, said the king, me forthinketh of that I have said,
for your brother is here within. And when Ector de Maris understood
that his brother was there, for he was the man in the world that he
most dread and loved, and then he said, Alas, now doubleth my sorrow
and shame, full truly said the good man of the hill unto Gawaine and to
me of our dreams. Then went he out of the court as fast as his courser
might run, and so through out the castle.


CHAPTER XVII.
-------------

_How Sir Launcelot returned towards Logris, and of other adventures
which he saw in the way._

Then king Pelles came to Sir Launcelot, and told him tidings of his
brother, whereof he was sorry that he wist not what to do. So Sir
Launcelot departed, and took his armour, and said that he would go see
the realm of Logris--which I have not seen in a twelvemonth. And
therewith commended the king to God, and so rode through many realms.
And at the last he came to a white abbey, and there they made him that
night great cheer. And on the morn he arose and heard mass, and afore
an altar he found a rich tomb which was newly made, and then he took
heed, and saw the sides written with letters of gold, which said, Here
lieth king Bagdemagus of Gore, the which king Arthur's nephew
slew:--and named him Sir Gawaine. Then was not he a little sorry, for
Launcelot loved him much more than any other, and had it been any other
than Gawaine he should not have escaped from death to life:--said to
himself, Alas, this is a great hurt to king Arthur's court, the loss of
such a man. And then he departed, and came to the abbey where Galahad
did the adventure of the tombs, and wan the white shield with the red
cross, and there had he great cheer all that night. And on the morn he
turned unto Camelot, where he found king Arthur and the queen. But many
of the knights of the Round Table were slain and destroyed, more than
half. And so three were come home, Ector, Gawaine, and Lionel, and many
other that need not to be rehearsed. And all the court was passing glad
of Sir Launcelot; and the king asked him many tidings of his son
Galahad. And there Launcelot told the king of his adventures that had
befallen him since he departed. And also he told him of the adventures
of Galahad, Percivale, and Bors, which that he knew by the letter of
the dead damsel, and as Galahad had told him. Now, God would, said the
king, that they were all three here. That shall never be, said
Launcelot, for two of them shall ye never see, but one of them shall
come again.

Now leave we this story, and speak we of Galahad.


CHAPTER XVIII.
--------------

_How Galahad came to king Mordrains, and of other matters and
adventures._

Now saith the story that Galahad rode many journeys in vain. And at the
last he came to the abbey where king Mordrains was, and when he heard
that, he thought he would abide to see him. And upon the morn, when he
had heard mass, Galahad came unto king Mordrains, and anon the king saw
him, the which had lain blind of long time. And then he dressed him
against him, and said, Galahad, the servant of Jesu Christ, whose
coming I have abiden so long, now embrace me, and let me rest on thy
breast, so that I may rest between thine arms, for thou art a clean
virgin above all knights, as the flower of the lily, in whom virginity
is signified, and thou art the rose, the which is the flower of all
good virtue, and in colour of fire. For the fire of the Holy Ghost is
taken so in thee, that my flesh, which was all dead of oldness, is
become young again. When Galahad heard his words, then he embraced him
and all his body. Then said he, Fair Lord Jesu Christ, now I have my
will, now I require thee in this point that I am in, thou come and
visit me. And anon our Lord heard his prayer. Therewith the soul
departed from the body. And then Galahad put him in the earth as a king
ought to be: and so departed, and came into a perilous forest, where he
found the well the which boiled with great waves, as the tale telleth
tofore. And as soon as Galahad set his hand thereto it ceased, so that
it burnt no more, and the heat departed: for that it burnt it was a
sign of lust; but that heat might not abide his pure virginity. And
this was taken in the country for a miracle, and so ever after was it
called Galahad's well. Then by adventure he came into the country of
Gore, and into the abbey where Sir Launcelot had been toforehand, and
found the tomb of king Bagdemagus (but was founder thereof Joseph of
Armathie's son) and the tomb of Simeon where Launcelot had failed. Then
he looked into a croft under the minster, and there he saw a tomb which
burnt full marvellously. Then asked he the brethren what it was? Sir,
said they, a marvellous adventure that may not be brought unto none
end, but by him that passeth of bounty and of knighthood all them of
the Round Table. I would, said Galahad, that ye would lead me thereto.
Gladly, said they: and so led him till a cave; and he went down upon
steps and came nigh the tomb, and then the flaming failed and the fire
staunched, the which many a day had been great. Then came there a voice
that said, Much are ye beholden to thank our Lord, the which hath given
you a good hour, that ye may draw out the souls of earthly pain, and to
put them into the joys of paradise. I am of your kindred, the which
have dwelled in this heat this three hundred winter and four and fifty,
to be purged of the sin that I did against Joseph of Armathie. Then
Galahad took the body in his arms, and bear it into the minster. And
that night lay Galahad in the abbey: and on the morn he gave him
service, and put him in the earth, afore the high altar.


CHAPTER XIX.
------------

_How Sir Percivale and Sir Bors met with Sir Galahad, and how they came
to the castle of Carbonek, and other matters._

So departed he from thence, and commended the brethren to God. And so
he rode five days till that he came to the maimed king, and ever
followed Percivale the five days, asking where he had been, and so one
told him how the adventures of Logris were achieved. So on a day it
befell that they came out of a great forest, and there they met at
travers with Sir Bors, the which rode alone. It is no need to tell if
they were glad, and them he saluted, and they yielded him honour and
good adventure; and every each told other. Then said Bors, It is more
than a year and a half that I ne lay ten times where men dwelled, but
in wild forests and in mountains, but God was ever my comfort.

Then rode they a great while till that they came to the castle of
Carbonek. And when they were entered within the castle king Pelles knew
them. Then there was great joy, for they wist well by their coming that
they had fulfilled the quest of the Sancgreal. Then Eliazar, king
Pelles' son, brought afore them the broken sword wherewith Joseph was
stricken through the thigh. Then Bors set his hand thereto, if he might
have soldered it again, but it would not be. Then he took it to
Percivale, but he had no more power thereto than he. Now have ye it
again, said Percivale to Galahad, for and it be ever achieved by one
bodily man, ye must do it. And then took he the pieces and set them
together, and they seemed that they had never been broken, and as well
as it had been first forged. And when they within espied that the
adventure of the sword was achieved, then they gave the sword to Bors,
for it might not be better set, for he was a good knight, and a worthy
man. And a little afore even the sword arose great and marvellous, and
was full of great heat, that many men fell for dread. And anon alight a
voice among them, and said, They that ought not to sit at the table of
Jesu Christ arise, for now shall very knights be fed. So they went
thence all save king Pelles and Eliazar his son, the which were holy
men, and a maid which was his niece. And so these three fellows and
they three were there; no more. Anon they saw knights all armed come in
at the hall door, and did off their helms and their arms, and said unto
Galahad, Sir, we have hied right much for to be with you at this table,
where the holy meat shall be parted. Then said he, Ye be welcome: but
of whence be ye? So three of them said they were of Gaul, and other
three said they were of Ireland, and the other three said they were of
Denmark. So as they sat thus, there came out a bed of tree of a
chamber, the which four gentlewomen brought, and in the bed lay a good
man sick, and a crown of gold upon his head; and there in the midst of
the place they set him down, and went again their way. Then he lift up
his head and said, Galahad, knight, ye be welcome, for much have I
desired your coming, for in such pain and in such anguish I have been
long. But now I trust to God the term is come that my pain shall be
allayed, that I shall pass out of this world, so as it was promised me
long ago. Therewith a voice said, There be two among you that be not in
the quest of the Sancgreal, and therefore depart ye.


CHAPTER XX.
-----------

_How Galahad and his fellows were fed of the holy Sangreal, and how our
Lord appeared to them, and other things._

Then king Pelles and his son departed. And therewithal beseemed them
that there came a man and four angels from heaven, clothed in likeness
of a bishop, and had a cross in his hand, and these four angels bare
him up in a chair, and set him down before the table of silver
whereupon the Sancgreal was, and it seemed that he had in midst of his
forehead letters that said, See ye here Joseph the first bishop of
Christendom, the same which our Lord succoured in the city of Sarras,
in the spiritual place. Then the knights marvelled, for that bishop was
dead more than three hundred year tofore. Oh knights, said he, marvel
not, for I was sometime an earthly man. With that they heard the
chamber door open, and there they saw angels, and two bare candles of
wax, and the third a towel, and the fourth a spear which bled
marvellously, that three drops fell within a box which he held with his
other hand. And they set the candles upon the table, and the third the
towel upon the vessel, and the fourth the holy spear even upright upon
the vessel. And then the bishop made semblant as though he would have
gone to the sacring of the mass. And then he took an ubbly, which was
made in likeness of bread; and at the lifting up there came a figure in
likeness of a child, and the visage was as red and as bright as any
fire, and smote himself into the bread, so that they all saw it, that
the bread was formed of a fleshly man, and then he put it into the holy
vessel again. And then he did that longed to a priest to do to a mass.
And then he went to Galahad and kissed him, and bad him go and kiss his
fellows, and so he did anon. Now, said he, servants of Jesu Christ, ye
shall be fed afore this table with sweet meats, that never knights
tasted. And when he had said, he vanished away; and they set them at
the table in great dread, and made their prayers. Then looked they, and
saw a man come out of the holy vessel, that had all the signs of the
passion of Jesu Christ, bleeding all openly, and said, My knights and
my servants and my true children, which be come out of deadly life into
spiritual life, I will now no longer hide me from you, but ye shall see
now a part of my secrets and of my hid things: now hold and receive the
high meat which ye have so much desired. Then took he himself the holy
vessel, and came to Galahad, and he kneeled down and there he received
his Saviour, and after him so received all his fellows; and they
thought it so sweet that it was marvellous to tell. Then said he to
Galahad, Son, wotest thou what I hold betwixt my hands? Nay, said he,
but if ye will tell me. This is, said he, the holy dish wherein I ate
the lamb on Sher-thursday. And now hast thou seen that thou most
desiredst to see, but yet hast thou not seen it so openly as thou shalt
see it in the city of Sarras, in the spiritual place. Therefore thou
must go hence, and bear with thee this holy vessel, for this night it
shall depart from the realm of Logris, that it shall never be seen more
here, and wotest thou wherefore? for he is not served nor worshipped to
his right, by them of this land, for they be turned to evil living,
therefore I shall disherit them of the honour which I have done them.
And therefore go ye three to-morrow unto the sea, where ye shall find
your ship ready, and with you take the sword with the strange girdles,
and no more with you, but Sir Percivale and Sir Bors. Also I will that
ye take with you of the blood of this spear, for to anoint the maimed
king, both his legs and all his body, and he shall have his health.
Sir, said Galahad, why shall not these other fellows go with us?--For
this cause, for right as I departed mine apostles, one here and another
there, so I will that ye depart. And two of you shall die in my
service, but one of you shall come again, and tell tidings. Then gave
he them his blessing and vanished away.


CHAPTER XXI.
------------

_How Galahad anointed with the blood of the spear the maimed king, and
other adventures._

And Galahad went anon to the spear which lay upon the table, and
touched the blood with his fingers, and came after to the maimed king,
and anointed his legs. And therewith he clothed him anon, and start
upon his feet out of his bed as an whole man, and thanked our Lord that
he had healed him. And that was not to the world-ward, for anon he
yield him to a place of religion of white monks, and was a full holy
man. That same night, about midnight came a voice among them, which
said, My sons and not my chieftains, my friends and not my warriors, go
ye hence, where ye hope best to do, and as I bad you.--Ah, thanked be
thou, Lord, that thou wilt vouchsafe to call us thy sinners. Now may we
well prove that we have not lost our pains.

And anon in all haste they took their harness and departed. But the
three knights of Gaul, one of them hight Claudine, king Claudas' son,
and the other two were great gentlemen. Then prayed Galahad to every
each of them, that if they come to king Arthur's court, that they
should salute my lord Sir Launcelot my father, and of them of the Round
Table, and prayed them if that they came on that part that they should
not forget it. Right so departed Galahad, Percivale, and Bors with him.
And so they rode three days, and then they came to a rivage, and found
the ship whereof the tale speaketh of tofore. And when they came to the
board, they found in the midst the table of silver which they had left
with the maimed king, and the Sancgreal, which was covered with red
samite. Then were they glad to have such things in their fellowship,
and so they entered, and made great reverence thereto, and Galahad fell
in his prayer long time to our Lord, that, at what time he asked, that
he should pass out of this world: so much he prayed, till a voice said
to him, Galahad, thou shalt have thy request, and when thou askest the
death of thy body thou shalt have it, and then shalt thou find the life
of the soul. Percivale heard this, and prayed him of fellowship that
was between them, to tell him wherefore he asked such things. That
shall I tell you, said Galahad: the other day when we saw a part of the
adventures of the Sancgreal, I was in such a joy of heart that I trow
never man was that was earthly, and therefore I wot well when my body
is dead my soul shall be in great joy to see the blessed Trinity every
day, and the majesty of our Lord Jesu Christ. So long were they in the
ship that they said to Galahad, Sir, in this bed ought ye to lie, for
so saith the scripture. And so he laid him down and slept a great
while. And when he awaked he looked afore him, and saw the city of
Sarras. And as they would have landed, they saw the ship wherein
Percivale had put his sister in. Truly, said Percivale, in the name of
God, well hath my sister holden us covenant. Then took they out of the
ship the table of silver, and he took it to Percivale and to Bors to go
tofore, and Galahad came behind, and right so they went to the city,
and at the gate of the city they saw an old man crooked. Then Galahad
called him, and bad him help to bear this heavy thing. Truly, said the
old man, it is ten year ago that I might not go but with crutches. Care
thou not, said Galahad, and arise up and shew thy good will. And so he
assayed, and found himself as whole as ever he was. Then ran he to the
table, and took one part against Galahad. And anon arose there great
noise in the city, that a cripple was made whole by knights marvellous
that entered into the city. Then anon after, the three knights went to
the water, and brought up into the palace Percivale's sister, and
buried her as richly as a king's daughter ought to be. And when the
king of the city, which was cleped Estorause, saw the fellowship, he
asked them of whence they were, and what thing it was that they had
brought upon the table of silver. And they told him the truth of the
Sancgreal, and the power which that God had set there. Then the king
was a tyrant, and was come of the line of paynims, and took them, and
put them in prison in a deep hole.


CHAPTER XXII.
-------------

_How they were fed with the Sangreal while they were in prison, and how
Galahad was made king._

But as soon as they were there, our Lord sent them the Sancgreal,
through whose grace they were alway fulfilled while that they were in
prison. So at the year's end it befell that this king Estorause lay
sick, and felt that he should die. Then he sent for the three knights,
and they came afore him, and he cried them mercy of that he had done to
them, and they forgave it him goodly, and he died anon. When the king
was dead, all the city was dismayed, and wist not who might be their
king. Right so as they were in counsel, there came a voice among them,
and bad them choose the youngest knight of them three to be their king,
for he shall well maintain you and all yours. So they made Galahad king
by all the assent of the whole city, and else they would have slain
him. And when he was come to behold the land, he let make about the
table of silver a chest of gold and of precious stones that covered the
holy vessel, and every day early the three fellows would come afore it
and make their prayers. Now at the year's end, and the self day after
Galahad had borne the crown of gold, he arose up early, and his
fellows, and came to the palace, and saw tofore them the holy vessel,
and a man kneeling on his knees, in likeness of a bishop, that had
about him a great fellowship of angels, as it had been Jesu Christ
himself. And then he arose and began a mass of Our Lady. And when he
came to the sacrament of the mass, and had done, anon he called
Galahad, and said to him, Come forth, the servant of Jesu Christ, and
thou shalt see that thou hast much desired to see. And then he began to
tremble right hard, when the deadly flesh began to behold the spiritual
things. Then he held up his hands toward heaven, and said, Lord, I
thank thee, for now I see that that hath been my desire many a day.
Now, blessed Lord, would I not longer live, if it might please thee
Lord. And therewith the good man took our Lord's body betwixt his
hands, and proffered it to Galahad, and he received it right gladly and
meekly. Now, wotest thou what I am? said the good man. Nay, said
Galahad.--I am Joseph of Armathie, which our Lord hath sent here to
thee to bear thee fellowship. And wotest thou wherefore that he hath
sent me more than any other? For thou hast resembled me in two things,
in that thou hast seen the marvels of the Sancgreal, and in that thou
hast been a clean maiden, as I have been and am. And when he had said
these words, Galahad went to Percivale and kissed him, and commanded
him to God. And so he went to Sir Bors and kissed him, and commanded
him to God, and said, Fair lord, salute me to my lord Sir Launcelot, my
father, and as soon as ye see him bid him remember of this unstable
world. And therewith he kneeled down tofore the table and made his
prayers, and then suddenly his soul departed to Jesu Christ, and a
great multitude of angels bare his soul up to heaven, that the two
fellows might well behold it. Also the two fellows saw come from heaven
an hand, but they saw not the body; and then it came right to the
vessel, and took it and the spear, and so bare it up to heaven. Sithen
was there never man so hardy to say that he had seen the Sancgreal.


CHAPTER XXIII.
--------------

_Of the sorrow that Percivale and Bors made when Galahad was dead; and
of Percivale how he died, and other matters._

When Percivale and Bors saw Galahad dead, they made as much sorrow as
ever did two men: and if they had not been good men they might lightly
have fallen in despair. And the people of the country and of the city
were right heavy. And then he was buried. And as soon as he was buried,
Sir Percivale yielded him to an hermitage out of the city, and took a
religious clothing; and Bors was alway with him, but never changed he
his secular clothing, for that he purposed him to go again into the
realm of Logris. Thus a year and two months lived Sir Percivale in the
hermitage a full holy life, and then passed out of this world. And Bors
let bury him by his sister and by Galahad in the spiritualties. When
Bors saw that he was in so far countries as in the parts of Babylon, he
departed from Sarras, and armed him, and came to the sea, and entered
into a ship, and so it befell him in good adventure he came into the
realm of Logris. And he rode so fast till he came to Camelot where the
king was. And then was there great joy made of him in the court, for
they wend all he had been dead, forasmuch as he had been so long out of
the country. And when they had eaten, the king made great clerks to
come afore him, that they should chronicle of the high adventures of
the good knights. When Bors had told him of the adventures of the
Sancgreal, such as had befallen him and his three fellows, that was
Launcelot, Percivale, Galahad and himself. There Launcelot told the
adventures of the Sancgreal that he had seen. All this was made in
great books, and put in almeries at Salisbury. And anon Sir Bors said
to Sir Launcelot, Galahad your own son saluted you by me, and after you
king Arthur, and all the court, and so did Sir Percivale: for I buried
them with mine own hands in the city of Sarras. Also, Sir Launcelot,
Galahad prayeth you to remember of this uncertain world, as ye behight
him when ye were together more than half a year. This is true, said
Launcelot; now I trust to God his prayer shall avail me. Then Launcelot
took Sir Bors in his arms, and said, Gentle cousin, ye are right
welcome to me, and all that ever I may do for you and for yours, ye
shall find my poor body ready at all times whiles the spirit is in it,
and that I promise you faithfully, and never to fail. And wit ye well,
gentle cousin Sir Bors, that ye and I will never depart in sunder
whilst our lives may last. Sir, said he, I will as ye will.


End of the Seventeenth Book.
============================
