The Nineteenth Book.
====================

CHAPTER I.
----------

_How queen Guenever rode on Maying with certain knights of the Round
Table and clad all in green._

So it befell in the month of May, queen Guenever called unto her
knights of the Table Round, and she gave them warning that early upon
the morrow she would ride on maying into woods and fields beside
Westminster.--And I warn you that there be none of you but that he be
well horsed, and that ye all be clothed in green, either in silk,
either in cloth, and I shall bring with me ten ladies, and every knight
shall have a lady behind him, and every knight shall have a squire and
two yeomen, and I will that ye all be well horsed. So they made them
ready in the freshest manner, and these were the names of the knights:
Sir Kay the seneschal, Sir Agravaine, Sir Brandiles, Sir Sagramor le
Desirous, Sir Dodinas le Savage, Sir Ozanna le Cure Hardy, Sir Ladinas
of the Forest Savage, Sir Persant of Inde, Sir Ironside that was called
the knight of the red lawns, and Sir Pelleas the lover, and these ten
knights made them ready in the freshest manner to ride with the queen.
And so upon the morn they took their horses, with the queen, and rode
on maying in woods and meadows, as it pleased them, in great joy and
delights: for the queen had cast to have been again with king Arthur at
the furthest by ten of the clock, and so was that time her purpose.
Then there was a knight, that hight Meliagrance, and he was son unto
king Bagdemagus, and this knight had at that time a castle, of the gift
of king Arthur, within seven mile of Westminster; and this knight Sir
Meliagrance loved passing well queen Guenever, and so had he done long
and many years. And the book saith he had lain in a wait for to steal
away the queen, but evermore he forbare for because of Sir Launcelot,
for in no wise he would meddle with the queen, and Sir Launcelot were
in her company, or else and he were near hand her. And that time was
such a custom the queen rode never without a great fellowship of men of
arms about her; and they were many good knights, and the most part were
young men that would have worship, and they were called the queen's
knights, and never in no battle, tournament, nor justs, they bare none
of them no manner of knowledging of their own arms, but plain white
shields, and thereby they were called the queen's knights. And then
when it happed any of them to be of great worship by his noble deeds,
then at the next feast of Pentecost, if there were any slain or dead,
as there was no year that there failed but some were dead, then was
there chosen in his stead that was dead the most men of worship that
were called the queen's knights. And thus they came up all first, or
they were renowned men of worship, both Sir Launcelot and all the
remnant of them. But this knight, Sir Meliagrance, had espied the queen
well and her purpose, and how Sir Launcelot was not with her, and how
she had no men of arms with her but the ten noble knights all arrayed
in green for maying. Then he provided him a twenty men of arms and an
hundred archers, for to destroy the queen and her knights, for he
thought that time was the best season to take the queen.


CHAPTER II.
-----------

_How Sir Meliagraunce took the queen and all her knights, which were
sore hurt in fighting._

So as the queen had mayed and all her knights, all were bedashed with
herbs, mosses, and flowers, in the best manner and freshest. Right so
came out of a wood Sir Meliagrance with an eight score men well
harnessed, as they should fight in a battle of arrest, and bad the
queen and her knights abide, for maugre their heads they should abide.
Traitor knight, said queen Guenever, what castest thou for to do? Wilt
thou shame thyself? Bethink thee how thou art a king's son, and knight
of the Table Round, and thou to be about to dishonour the noble king
that made thee knight: thou shamest all knighthood and thyself, and me,
I let thee wit, shalt thou never shame, for I had lever cut my throat
in twain than thou shouldest dishonour me. As for all this language,
said Sir Meliagrance, be it as it may, for wit you well, madam, I have
loved you many a year, and never or now could I get you at such an
advantage as I do now, and therefore I will take you as I find you.
Then spake all the ten noble knights at once, and said, Sir
Meliagrance, wit thou well ye are about to jeopard your worship to
dishonour, and also ye cast to jeopard our persons; howbeit we be
unarmed, ye have us at a great avail, for it seemeth by you that ye
have laid watch upon us, but rather then ye should put the queen to
shame, and us all, we had as lief to depart from our lives, for and if
we other ways did we were shamed for ever. Then Sir Meliagrance said,
Dress you as well as ye can, and keep the queen. Then the ten knights
of the Table Round drew their swords, and the other let run at them
with their spears, and the ten knights manly abode them, and smote away
their spears, that no spear did them none harm. Then they lashed
together with swords, and anon Sir Kay, Sir Sagramor, Sir Agravaine,
Sir Dodinas, Sir Ladinas, and Sir Ozanna, were smitten to the earth
with grimly wounds. Then Sir Brandiles, and Sir Persant, Sir Ironside,
Sir Pelleas, fought long, and they were sore wounded: for these ten
knights, or ever they were laid to the ground, slew forty men of the
boldest and the best of them. So when the queen saw her knights thus
dolefully wounded, and needs must be slain at the last, then for pity
and sorrow she cried, Sir Meliagrance, slay not my noble knights, and I
will go with thee upon this covenant, that thou save them, and suffer
them not to be no more hurt, with this, that they be led with me
wheresoever thou leadest me; for I will rather slay myself than I will
go with thee, unless that these my noble knights may be in my presence.
Madam, said Meliagrance, for your sake they shall be led with you into
mine own castle, with that ye will be ruled and ride with me. Then the
queen prayed the four knights to leave their fighting, and she and they
would not part. Madam, said Sir Pelleas, we will do as ye do, for as
for me I take no force of my life nor death. For, as the French book
saith, Sir Pelleas gave such buffets there that none armour might hold
him.


CHAPTER III.
------------

_How Sir Launcelot had word how the queen was taken, and how Sir
Meliagraunce laid a bushment for Launcelot._

Then by the queen's commandment they left battle, and dressed the
wounded knights on horseback, some sitting, some overthwart their
horses, that it was pity to behold them. And then Sir Meliagrance
charged the queen and all her knights that none of all her fellowship
should depart from her; for full sore he drad Sir Launcelot du Lake,
lest he should have any knowledging. All this espied the queen, and
privily she called unto her a child of her chamber, that was swiftly
horsed, to whom she said, Go thou, when thou seest thy time, and bear
this ring unto Sir Launcelot du Lake, and pray him as he loveth me,
that he will see me, and rescue me if ever he will have joy of me; and
spare thou not thy horse, said the queen, neither for water, neither
for land. So the child espied his time, and lightly he took his horse
with the spurs, and departed as fast as he might. And when Sir
Meliagrance saw him so flee, he understood that it was by the queen's
commandment for to warn Sir Launcelot. Then they that were best horsed
chased him, and shot at him, but from them all the child went suddenly;
and then Sir Meliagrance said unto the queen, Madam, ye are about to
betray me, but I shall ordain for Sir Launcelot that he shall not come
lightly at you. And then he rode with her and they all to his castle in
all the haste that he might. And by the way Sir Meliagrance laid in an
enbushment the best archers that he might get in his country, to the
number of a thirty, to await upon Sir Launcelot, charging them that if
they saw such a manner of knight come by the way upon a white horse,
that in any wise they slay his horse, but in no manner of wise have not
ado with him bodily, for he is over hard to be overcome. So this was
done, and they were come to his castle, but in no wise the queen would
never let none of the ten knights and her ladies out of her sight, but
always they were in her presence, for the book saith Sir Meliagrance
durst make no masteries for dread of Sir Launcelot, in so much he
deemed that he had warning. So when the child was departed from the
fellowship of Sir Meliagrance, within awhile he came to Westminster.
And anon he found Sir Launcelot. And when he had told his message, and
delivered him the queen's ring, Alas, said Sir Launcelot, now am I
shamed for ever, unless that I may rescue that noble lady from
dishonour. Then eagerly he asked his armour, and ever the child told
Sir Launcelot how the ten knights fought marvellously, and how Sir
Pelleas, and Sir Ironside, and Sir Brandiles, and Sir Persant of Inde,
fought strongly, but namely Sir Pelleas, there might none withstand
him, and how they all fought till at the last they were laid to the
earth, and then the queen made appointment for to save their lives, and
go with Sir Meliagrance. Alas, said Sir Launcelot, that most noble
lady, that she should be so destroyed! I had lever, said Sir Launcelot,
than all France that I had been there well armed. So when Sir Launcelot
was armed and upon his horse, he prayed the child of the queen's
chamber to warn Sir Lavaine how suddenly he was departed, and for what
cause,--And pray him, as he loveth me, that he will hie him after me,
and that he stint not until he come to the castle where Sir Meliagrance
abideth or dwelleth, for there, said Sir Launcelot, shall he hear of me
and I am a man living, and rescue the queen and the ten knights the
which he traitorously hath taken, and that shall I prove upon his head,
and all them that hold with him.


CHAPTER IV.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot's horse was slain, and how Sir Launcelot rode in a
cart for to rescue the queen._

Then Sir Launcelot rode as fast as he might, and the book saith he took
the water at Westminster bridge, and made his horse to swim over Thames
to Lambeth. And then within a while he came to the place there as the
ten knights had fought with Sir Meliagrance, and then Sir Launcelot
followed that track until that he came to a wood, and there was a
strait way, and there the thirty archers bad Sir Launcelot turn again,
and follow no longer that track. What commandment have ye thereto, said
Sir Launcelot, to cause me, that am a knight of the Round Table, to
leave my right way? This way shalt thou leave, or else thou shalt go it
on thy foot, for wit thou well thy horse shall be slain. That is little
mastery, said Sir Launcelot, to slay my horse, but as for myself, when
my horse is slain, I give right nought for you, not and ye were five
hundred more. So then they shot Sir Launcelot's horse, and smote him
with many arrows. And then Sir Launcelot avoided his horse, and went on
foot: but there were so many ditches and hedges betwixt them and him,
that he might not meddle with none of them. Alas, for shame, said
Launcelot, that ever one knight should betray another knight, but it is
an old saw, A good man is never in danger but when he is in the danger
of a coward. Then Sir Launcelot went a while, and then he was foul
cumbered of his armour, his shield, and his spear, and all that longed
unto him. Wit ye well he was full sore annoyed, and full loth he was to
leave any thing that longed unto him, for he drad sore the treason of
Sir Meliagrance. And then by fortune there came by a chariot, that came
thither for to fetch wood. Say me, carter, said Sir Launcelot, what
shall I give thee for to suffer me to leap into thy chariot, and that
thou bring me unto a castle within this two mile? Thou shalt not come
within my chariot, said the carter, for I am sent for to fetch wood for
my lord Sir Meliagrance.--With him would I speak.--Thou shalt not go
with me, said the carter. Then Sir Launcelot lept to him, and gave him
such a buffet that he fell to the earth stark dead. Then the other
carter his fellow was afeard, and wend to have gone the same way, and
then he cried, Fair lord, save my life, and I shall bring you where you
will. Then I charge thee, said Sir Launcelot, that thou drive me and
this chariot, even unto Sir Meliagrance's gate. Leap up into the
chariot, said the carter, and ye shall be there anon. So the carter
drove on a great wallop, and Sir Launcelot's horse followed the
chariot, with more than a forty arrows broad and rough in him: and more
than an hour and an half dame Guenever was in a bay window with her
ladies, and espied an armed knight standing in a chariot. See madam,
said a lady, where rideth in a chariot a goodly armed knight, I suppose
he rideth unto hanging. Where? said the queen. Then she espied by his
shield that he was there himself Sir Launcelot du Lake. And then she
was ware where came his horse ever after that chariot, and ever he trod
his entrails and his paunch under his feet. Alas, said the queen, now I
see well and prove that well is him that hath a trusty friend. Ha, a,
most noble knight, I see well thou art hard bestad when thou ridest in
a chariot. Then she rebuked that lady that likened Sir Launcelot to
ride in a chariot to hanging. It was foul mouthed, said the queen, and
evil likened, so for to liken the most noble knight of the world unto
such a shameful death. O Jesu defend him and keep him, said the queen,
from all mischievous end! By this was Sir Launcelot come to the gates
of that castle, and there he descended down, and cried, that all the
castle rang of it, Where art thou, false traitor Sir Meliagrance, and
knight of the Table Round? Now come forth here thou traitor knight,
thou and thy fellowship with thee: for here I am, Sir Launcelot du
Lake, that shall fight with you. And therewithal he bare the gate wide
open upon the porter, and smote him under his ear with his gauntlet
that his neck brast in sunder.


CHAPTER V.
----------

_How Sir Meliagraunce required forgiveness of the queen, and how she
appeased Sir Launcelot, and other matters._

When Sir Meliagrance heard that Sir Launcelot was there, he ran unto
queen Guenever, and fell upon his knee, and said, Mercy, madam, now I
put me wholly into your grace. What aileth you now? said queen
Guenever. Forsooth I might well wit some good knight would revenge me,
though my lord Arthur wist not of this your work. Madam, said Sir
Meliagrance, all this that is amiss on my part shall be amended right
as yourself will devise, and wholly I put me in your grace. What would
ye that I did? said the queen. I would no more, said Meliagrance, but
that ye would take all in your own hands, and that ye will rule my lord
Sir Launcelot, and such cheer as may be made him in this poor castle ye
and he shall have until to-morn, and then may ye and all they return
unto Westminster, and my body and all that I have I shall put in your
rule. Ye say well, said the queen, and better is peace than ever war,
and the less noise the more is my worship. Then the queen and her
ladies went down unto the knight Sir Launcelot, that stood wroth out of
measure in the inner court, to abide battle; and ever he bade--Thou
traitor knight, come forth! Then the queen came to him and said, Sir
Launcelot, why be ye so moved? Ha, madam, said Sir Launcelot, why ask
ye me that question? me seemeth, said Sir Launcelot, ye ought to be
more wroth than I am, for ye have the hurt and the dishonour. For wit
ye well, madam, my hurt is but little, for the killing of a mare's son;
but the despite grieveth me much more than all my hurt. Truly, said the
queen, ye say truth, but heartily I thank you, said the queen, but ye
must come in with me peaceably, for all thing is put in my hand, and
all that is evil shall be for the best, for the knight full sore
repenteth him of the misadventure that is befallen him. Madam, said Sir
Launcelot, sith it is so that ye are accorded with him, as for me I may
not be against it, howbeit Sir Meliagrance hath done full shamefully to
me, and cowardly. Ah, madam, and I had wist ye would have been so soon
accorded with him, I would not have made such haste unto you. Why say
ye so? said the queen, do ye forthink yourself of your good deeds? Wit
you well, said the queen, I accorded never unto him for favour nor love
that I had unto him, but for to lay down every shameful noise. Madam,
said Sir Launcelot, ye understand full well I was never willing nor
glad of shameful slander, nor noise; and there is neither king, queen,
nor knight, that beareth the life, except my lord king Arthur, and you,
madam, that should let me, but I should make Sir Meliagrance's heart
full cold or ever I departed from hence. That I wot well, said the
queen, but what will ye more? ye shall have all thing ruled as ye list
to have it. Madam, said Sir Launcelot, so ye be pleased I care not, as
for my part ye shall soon please. Right so the queen took Sir Launcelot
by the bare hand, for he had put off his gauntlet, and so she went with
him till her chamber; and then she commanded him to be unarmed, and
then Sir Launcelot asked where the ten knights were that were wounded
sore. So she shewed them unto Sir Launcelot, and there they made great
joy of the coming of him, and Sir Launcelot made great dole of their
hurts, and bewailed them greatly; and there Sir Launcelot told them how
cowardly and traitorly Meliagrance set archers to slay his horse, and
how he was fain to put himself in a chariot. Thus they complained every
each to other, and full fain they would have been revenged, but they
peaced themself because of the queen. Then, as the French book saith,
Sir Launcelot was called many a day after, Le Chevaler du Chariot, and
did many deeds, and great adventures he had. And so leave we of this
tale, Le Chevaler du Chariot, and turn we to this tale.

So Sir Launcelot had great cheer with the queen, and then Sir Launcelot
made a promise with the queen, that the same night Sir Launcelot should
come to a window outward toward a garden, and that window was y-barred
with iron; and there Sir Launcelot promised to meet her when all folks
were on sleep. So then came Sir Lavaine, driving to the gates, crying,
Where is my lord Sir Launcelot du Lake? Then was he sent for, and when
Sir Lavaine saw Sir Launcelot, he said: My lord, I found well how ye
were hard bestad, for I have found your horse, that was slain with
arrows. As for that, said Sir Launcelot, I pray you Sir Lavaine speak
ye of other matters, and let ye this pass, and we shall right it
another time, when we best may.


CHAPTER VI.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot came in the night to the queen, and how Sir
Meliagraunce appeached the queen of treason._

Then the knights that were hurt were searched, and soft salves were
laid to their wounds, and so it passed on till supper time; and all the
cheer that might be made them there was done unto the queen and all her
knights. Then when season was they went unto their chambers. But in no
wise the queen would not suffer the wounded knights to be from her, but
that they were laid within draughts by her chamber, upon beds and
pillows, that she herself might see to them, that they wanted nothing.
So when Launcelot was in his chamber that was assigned unto him, he
called unto Sir Lavaine, and told him that he must go speak with his
lady, dame Guenever. Sir, said Sir Lavaine, let me go with you, and it
please you, for I dread me sore of the treason of Sir Meliagrance. Nay,
said Sir Launcelot, I thank you, but I will have nobody with me. Then
Sir Launcelot took his sword in his hand, and privily went unto a place
whereas he had espied a ladder toforehand, and that he took under his
arm and bare it through the garden, and set it up to the window. And
there anon the queen was ready to meet him. And then they made either
to other their complaints of many divers things. And then Sir Launcelot
wished that he might have come in to her. Wit ye well, said the queen,
I would as fain as ye that ye might come in to me. Would ye, madam,
said Sir Launcelot, with your heart that I were with you? Yea truly,
said the queen. Now shall I prove my might, said Sir Launcelot, for
your love. And then he set his hands upon the bars of iron, and pulled
at them with such a might that he brast them clean out of the stone
walls. And therewithal one of the bars of iron cut the brawn of his
hands throughout to the bone, and then he lept into the chamber to the
queen. Make ye no noise, said the queen, for my wounded knights lie
here fast by me. And when he saw his time that he might tarry no
longer, he took his leave and departed at the window, and put it
together as well as he might again, and so departed unto his own
chamber; and there he told Sir Lavaine how he was hurt; then Sir
Lavaine dressed his hand, and staunched it, and put upon it a glove,
that it should not be espied. And so the queen lay long in her bed,
until it was nine of the clock. Then Sir Meliagrance went to the
queen's chamber, and found her ladies there ready clothed. Mercy, said
Sir Meliagrance, what aileth you, madam, that ye sleep thus long? And
then was he ware of the blood of Sir Launcelot's hurt hand. And when
Sir Meliagrance espied that blood, then he deemed in himself that she
was false unto the king, and that it was the blood of some of the
wounded knights. Ah, madam, said Sir Meliagrance, now I have founden
you a false traitress unto my lord Arthur; for now I prove well it was
not for nought that ye laid these wounded knights within the bounds of
your chamber: therefore I will call you of treason before my lord king
Arthur, and now I have proved you, madam, with a shameful deed, and
that they be all false, or some of them, I will make good, for a
wounded knight hath been here. That is false, said the queen, and that
I will report me to them all. Then when the ten knights heard Sir
Meliagrance's words, they spake all in one voice and said unto Sir
Meliagrance, Thou sayest falsely, and wrongfully puttest upon us such a
deed, and that we will make good any of us, choose which thou list of
us, when we are whole of our wounds. Ye shall not, said Sir
Meliagrance, away with your proud language, for here ye may all see
that a wounded knight hath been here. Then were they all ashamed when
they saw that blood, and wit you well Sir Meliagrance was passing glad
that he had the queen at such an advantage, for he deemed by that to
hide his treason. So with this rumour came in Sir Launcelot, and found
them all at a great array.


CHAPTER VII.
------------

_How Sir Launcelot answered for the queen, and waged battle against Sir
Meliagraunce. And how Sir Launcelot was taken in a trap._

What array is this? said Sir Launcelot. Then Sir Meliagrance told him
what he had found, and shewed him the blood. Truly, said Sir Launcelot,
ye did not your part nor knightly toward the queen, and therefore have
ye done unworshipfully and shamefully to yourself. I wot not what ye
mean, said Sir Meliagrance, but well I am sure there hath been one of
her wounded knights here, and therefore I will prove with my hands that
she is a traitress unto my lord Arthur. Beware what ye do, said Sir
Launcelot, for and ye say so, and that ye will prove it, it will be
taken at your hands. My lord Sir Launcelot, said Sir Meliagrance, I
rede you beware what ye do, for though ye are never so good a knight,
as ye wot well that ye are renowned the best knight of the world, yet
should ye be advised to do battle in a wrong quarrel, for God will have
a stroke in every battle. As for that, said Sir Launcelot, God is to be
dread. But as to that I say nay plainly, that this night none of these
ten wounded knights was here with my lady queen Guenever, and that will
I prove with my hands, that ye say untruly in that now. Hold, said Sir
Meliagrance, here is my glove, that she is traitress unto my lord king
Arthur, and that one of the wounded knights was here. And I receive
your glove, said Sir Launcelot. And so they were sealed with their
signets, and delivered unto the ten knights. At what day shall we do
battle together? said Sir Launcelot. This day eight days, said Sir
Meliagrance, in the field beside Westminster. I am agreed, said Sir
Launcelot. But now, said Sir Meliagrance, sithen it is that we must
fight together, I beseech you, as ye are a noble knight, await me with
no treason, nor none villainy the meanwhile, nor none for you. So God
me help, said Sir Launcelot, ye shall right well wit I was never of no
such conditions, for I report me to all knights that ever have known
me, I fared never with no treason, nor I loved never the fellowship of
no man that fared with treason. Then let us go to dinner, said
Meliagrance, and after dinner ye and the queen and ye may ride all to
Westminster. I will well, said Sir Launcelot. And Sir Meliagrance said
to Sir Launcelot, Pleaseth it you to see the eftures of this castle?
With a good will, said Sir Launcelot. And then they went together from
chamber to chamber, for Sir Launcelot dread no perils. For ever a man
of worship and of prowess dreadeth least always perils: for they ween
every man be as they be. But ever he that fareth with treason putteth
oft a man in great danger. So it befell upon Sir Launcelot that no
peril dread. As he went with Sir Meliagrance, he trod on a trap, and
the board rolled, and therewith Sir Launcelot fell down more than ten
fathom into a cave full of straw. And then Sir Meliagrance departed,
and made no fare as that he nist where he was. And when Sir Launcelot
was thus missed, they marvelled where he was become. And then queen
Guenever and many of them deemed that he was departed as he was wont to
do, suddenly. For Sir Meliagrance made suddenly to put away on side Sir
Lavaine's horse, that they might all understand that Sir Launcelot was
departed suddenly. So it past on till after dinner, and then Sir
Lavaine would not stint until that he ordained litters for the wounded
knights, that they might be laid in them, and so with the queen and
them all, both ladies and gentlewomen and other, went unto Westminster,
and there the knights told king Arthur how Meliagrance had appealed the
queen of high treason, and how Sir Launcelot had received the glove of
him, and this day eight days they shall do battle afore you. By my
head, said king Arthur, I am afeard Sir Meliagrance hath taken upon him
a great charge. But where is Sir Launcelot? said the king. Sir, said
they all, we wot not where he is, but we deem he is ridden to some
adventures, as he is ofttimes wont to do, for he hath Sir Lavaine's
horse. Let him be, said the king, he will be founden, but if he be
trapped with some treason.


CHAPTER VIII.
-------------

_How Sir Launcelot was delivered out of prison by a lady, and took a
white courser, and came for to keep his day._

So leave we Sir Launcelot, lying within that cave in great pain, and
every day there came a lady and brought him his meat and his drink, and
wooed him to love her. And ever the noble knight Sir Launcelot said her
nay. Sir Launcelot, said she, ye are not wise, for ye may never out of
this prison but if ye have my help, and also your lady queen Guenever
shall be burnt in your default, unless that ye be there at the day of
battle. God defend, said Sir Launcelot, that she should be burnt in my
default: and if it be so, said Sir Launcelot, that I may not be there,
it shall be well understood both at the king and at the queen, and with
all men of worship, that I am dead, sick, or in prison. For all men
that know me will say for me that I am in some evil case, and I be not
there that day, and well I wot there is some good knight, either of my
blood, or some other that loveth me, that will take my quarrel in hand:
and, therefore, said Sir Launcelot, wit ye well ye shall not fear me.
And if there were no more women in all this land but you, I would not
say otherwise. Then art thou shamed, said the lady, and destroyed for
ever. As for world's shame, Jesu defend me; and as for my distress, it
is welcome, whatsoever it be that God sendeth me. So she came to him
the same day that the battle should be, and said, Sir Launcelot, me
thinketh ye are too hard-hearted, but wouldest thou but kiss me once I
should deliver thee and thine armour, and the best horse that is within
Sir Meliagrance's stable. As for to kiss you, said Sir Launcelot, I may
do that, and lose no worship, and wit ye well, and I understood there
were any disworship for to kiss you, I would not do it. Then he kissed
her, and then she gat him and brought him to his armour. And when he
was armed, she brought him to a stable, where stood twelve good
coursers, and bad him choose the best. Then Sir Launcelot looked upon a
white courser, the which liked him best, and anon he commanded the
keepers fast to saddle him with the best saddle of war that there was,
and so it was done as he bade. Then gat he his spear in his hand, and
his sword by his side, and commanded the lady unto God, and said, Lady,
for this good deed I shall do you service if ever it be in my power.


CHAPTER IX.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot came the same time that Sir Meliagraunce abode him
in the field, and dressed him to battle._

Now leave we Sir Launcelot gallop all that he might, and speak we of
queen Guenever that was brought to a fire to be burnt, for Sir
Meliagrance was sure, him thought, that Sir Launcelot should not be at
that battle, therefore he ever cried upon king Arthur to do him
justice, or else bring forth Sir Launcelot du Lake. Then was the king
and all the court full sore abashed and shamed that the queen should be
burnt in the default of Sir Launcelot. My lord Arthur, said Sir
Lavaine, ye may understand that it is not well with my lord Sir
Launcelot, for and he were on live, so that he be not sick or in
prison, wit ye well he would be here, for never heard ye that ever he
failed his part for whom he should do battle for. And therefore, said
Sir Lavaine, my lord king Arthur, I beseech you give me licence to do
battle here this day for my lord and master, and for to save my lady
the queen. Gramercy, gentle knight, Sir Lavaine, said king Arthur, for
I dare say all that Sir Meliagrance putteth upon my lady the queen is
wrong, for I have spoken with all the ten wounded knights, and there is
not one of them, and he were whole and able to do battle, but he would
prove upon Sir Meliagrance's body that it is false that he putteth upon
my queen. So shall I, said Sir Lavaine, in the defence of my lord Sir
Launcelot, and ye will give me leave. Now I give you leave, said king
Arthur, and do your best, for I dare well say there is some treason
done to Sir Launcelot. Then was Sir Lavaine horsed, and suddenly at the
list's end he rode to perform this battle. And right as the heralds
should cry Lesses les aler, right so came in Sir Launcelot driving with
all the force of his horse. And then Arthur cried, Ho! and Abide! Then
was Sir Launcelot called on horseback tofore king Arthur, and there he
told openly tofore the king and all, how Sir Meliagrance had served him
first and last. And when the king and the queen and all the lords knew
of the treason of Sir Meliagrance, they were all ashamed on his behalf.
Then was queen Guenever sent for, and set by the king in great trust of
her champion. And then there was no more else to say, but Sir Launcelot
and Sir Meliagrance dressed them unto battle, and took their spears,
and so they came together as thunder, and there Sir Launcelot bare him
down quite over his horse croup. And then Sir Launcelot alight, and
dressed his shield on his shoulder with his sword in his hand, and Sir
Meliagrance in the same wise dressed him unto him, and there they smote
many great strokes together, and at the last Sir Launcelot smote him
such a buffet upon the helmet, that he fell on the one side to the
earth, and then he cried upon him aloud, Most noble knight, Sir
Launcelot du Lake, save my life, for I yield me unto you, and I beseech
you, as ye be a knight and fellow of the Table Round, slay me not, for
I yield me as overcomen, and whether I shall live or die I put me in
the king's hands and yours. Then Sir Launcelot wist not what to do, for
he had lever than all the good of the world he might have been revenged
upon Sir Meliagrance; and Sir Launcelot looked toward queen Guenever if
he might espy by any sign or countenance what she would have done. And
then the queen wagged her head upon Sir Launcelot, as though she would
say slay him. Full well knew Sir Launcelot by the wagging of her head
that she would have had him dead: then Sir Launcelot bad him rise for
shame, and perform that battle to the utterance. Nay, said Sir
Meliagrance, I will never arise until ye take me as yielden and
recreant. I shall proffer you large proffers, said Sir Launcelot, that
is to say, I shall unarm my head and my left quarter of my body, all
that may be unarmed, and let bind my left hand behind me, so that it
shall not help me, and right so I shall do battle with you. Then Sir
Meliagrance start up upon his legs, and said on high, My lord Arthur,
take heed to this proffer, for I will take it, and let him be disarmed
and bounden according to his proffer. What say ye, said king Arthur
unto Sir Launcelot, will ye abide by your proffer? Yea, my lord, said
Sir Launcelot, I will never go from that I have once said. Then the
knights parters of the field disarmed Sir Launcelot, first his head,
and sithen his left arm and his left side, and they bound his left arm
behind his back, without shield or anything, and then they were put
together. Wit you well there was many a lady and knight marvelled that
Sir Launcelot would jeopardy himself in such wise. Then Sir Meliagrance
came with his sword all on high, and Sir Launcelot shewed him openly
his bare head and the bare left side. And when he wend to have smitten
him upon the bare head, then lightly he avoided the left leg and the
left side, and put his right hand and his sword to that stroke, and so
put it on side with great sleight, and then with great force Sir
Launcelot smote him on the helmet such a buffet that the stroke carved
the head in two parts. Then there was no more to do but he was drawn
out of the field. And at the great instance of the knights of the Table
Round the king suffered him to be interred, and the mention made upon
him who slew him, and for what cause he was slain. And then the king
and the queen made more of Sir Launcelot, and more he was cherished,
than ever he was aforehand.


CHAPTER X.
----------

_How Sir Urre came into Arthur's court for to be healed of his wounds,
and how king Arthur would begin to handle him._

Then, as the French book maketh mention, there was a good knight in the
land of Hungary, his name was Sir Urre, and he was an adventurous
knight, and in all places where he might hear of any deeds of worship,
there would he be. So it happened in Spain there was an earl's son, his
name was Alphegus, and at a great tournament in Spain this Sir Urre,
knight of Hungary, and Sir Alphegus of Spain, encountered together for
very envy, and so either undertook other to the utterance, and by
fortune Sir Urre slew Sir Alphegus, the earl's son of Spain. But this
knight that was slain had given Sir Urre, or ever he was slain, seven
great wounds, three on the head, and four on his body and upon his left
hand. And this Sir Alphegus had a mother, the which was a great
sorceress, and she, for the despite of her son's death, wrought by her
subtile crafts that Sir Urre should never be whole, but ever his wounds
should one time fester and another time bleed, so that he should never
be whole, until the best knight of the world had searched his wounds,
and thus she made her avaunt, where through it was known that Sir Urre
should never be whole. Then his mother let make an horse-litter, and
put him therein under two palfreys, and then she took Sir Urre's sister
with him, a full fair damsel, whose name was Felelolie, and then she
took a page with him to keep their horses, and so they led Sir Urre
through many countries. For, as the French book saith, she led him so
seven year through all lands christened, and never she could find no
knight that might ease her son. So she came into Scotland, and into the
lands of England, and by fortune she came nigh the feast of Pentecost
until Arthur's court, that at that time was holden at Carlisle. And
when she came there, then she made it openly to be known how that she
was come into that land for to heal her son.

Then king Arthur let call the lady, and asked her the cause why she
brought that hurt knight into that land. My most noble king, said that
lady, wit you well I brought him hither for to be healed of his wounds,
that of all this seven year he might not be whole. And then she told
the king where he was wounded, and of whom, and how his mother had
discovered in her pride how she had wrought that by enchantment, so
that he should never be whole until the best knight of the world had
searched his wounds:--And so I have passed through all the lands
christened to have him healed, except this land: and if I fail to heal
him here in this land, I will never take more pain upon me, and that is
pity, for he was a good knight, and of great nobleness. What is his
name? said Arthur. My good and gracious lord, she said, his name is Sir
Urre of the Mount. In good time, said the king, and sith ye are come
into this land ye are right welcome. And wit you well here shall your
son be healed, and ever any christian man may heal him. And for to give
all other men of worship courage I myself will assay to handle your
son, and so shall all the kings, dukes, and earls that be here present
with me at this time; thereto will I command them, and well I wot they
shall obey and do after my commandment. And wit you well, said king
Arthur unto Urre's sister, I shall begin to handle him and search unto
my power, not presuming upon me that I am so worthy to heal your son by
my deeds, but I will encourage other men of worship to do as I will do.
And then the king commanded all the kings, dukes, and earls, and all
noble knights of the Round Table that were there that time present, to
come into the meadow of Carlisle. And so at that time there were but an
hundred and ten of the Round Table, for forty knights were that time
away. And so here we must begin at king Arthur, as is kindly to begin
at him that was the most man of worship that was christened at that
time.


CHAPTER XI.
-----------

_How king Arthur handled Sir Urre, and after him many other knights of
the Round Table._

Then king Arthur looked upon Sir Urre, and the king thought he was a
full likely man when he was whole. And king Arthur made him to be taken
down off the litter, and laid him upon the earth, and there was laid a
cushion of gold that he should kneel upon. And then Arthur said, Noble
fair knight, me repenteth of thy hurt, and for to courage all other
noble knights I will pray thee softly to suffer me to handle your
wounds. Most noble christened king, said Urre, do as ye list, for I am
at the mercy of God, and at your commandment. So then Arthur softly
handled him, and then some of his wounds renewed upon bleeding. Then
the king Clariance of Northumberland searched, and it would not be. And
then Sir Barant le Apres, that was called the king with the hundred
knights, he assayed, and failed; and so did king Urience, of the land
of Gore. So did king Anguissance of Ireland; so did king Nentres of
Garloth; so did king Carados of Scotland; so did the duke Galahalt, the
haut prince; so did Constantine, that was Sir Carados's son, of
Cornwall; so did duke Chalance of Clarance; so did the earl Ulbause; so
did the earl Lambaile; so did the earl Aristause. Then came in Sir
Gawaine, with his three sons, Sir Gingalin, Sir Florence, and Sir
Lovel; these two were begotten upon Sir Brandiles's sister; and all
they failed. Then came in Sir Agravaine, Sir Gaheris, Sir Mordred, and
the good knight Sir Gareth, which was of very knighthood worth all the
brethren. So came knights of Launcelot's kin, but Sir Launcelot was not
that time in the court, for he was that time upon his adventures. Then
Sir Lionel, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Blamor de Ganis,
Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, Sir Gahalantine, Sir Galihodin, Sir Menadeuke,
Sir Villiars the valiant, Sir Hebes le Renoumes. All these were of Sir
Launcelot's kin, and all they failed. Then came in Sir Sagramor le
Desirous, Sir Dodinas le Savage, Sir Dinadan, Sir Bruin le Noire, that
Sir Kay named la Cote Male Taile, and Sir Kay the seneschal, Sir Kay de
Stranges, Sir Meliot de Logris, Sir Petipase of Winchelsea, Sir
Galleron of Galway, Sir Melion of the mountain, Sir Cardok, Sir Uwaine
les Avoutres, and Sir Ozanna le Cure Hardy. Then came in Sir Astamore,
and Sir Gromere, Grummor's son, Sir Crosselme, Sir Servause le Breuse,
that was called a passing strong knight. For, as the book saith, the
chief Lady of the lake feasted this Sir Launcelot, and Sir Servause le
Breuse, and when she had feasted them both at sundry times, she prayed
them to give her a boon, and they granted it her, and then she prayed
Sir Servause that he would promise her never to do battle against Sir
Launcelot du Lake; and in the same wise she prayed Sir Launcelot never
to do battle against Sir Servause; and so either promised her. For the
French book saith that Sir Servause had never courage nor lust to do
battle against no man, but if it were against giants, and against
dragons, and wild beasts. So we pass unto them that, at the king's
request, made them all that were there at that high feast, as of the
knights of the Table Round, for to search Sir Urre: to that intent the
king did it, to wit which was the noblest knight among them.

Then there came Sir Aglovale, Sir Durnore, Sir Tor, and king Pellinore
begat them all, first, Sir Tor, Sir Aglovale, Sir Durnore, Sir Lamorak,
the most noblest knight, one that ever was in Arthur's days as for a
worldly knight, and Sir Percivale that was peerless, except Sir
Galahad, in holy deeds, but they died in the quest of the Sancgreal.
Then came Sir Griflet le Fise de Dieu, Sir Luca the botteler, Sir
Bedivere his brother, Sir Brandiles, Sir Constantine, Sir Cador's son
of Cornwall, that was king after Arthur's days, and Sir Clegis, Sir
Sadok, Sir Dinas le seneschal of Cornwall, Sir Fergus, Sir Driant, Sir
Lambegus, Sir Clarrus of Cleremont, Sir Cloddrus, Sir Hectimere, Sir
Edward of Carnarvan, Sir Dinas, Sir Priamus, that was christened by Sir
Tristram the noble knight, and these three were brethren; Sir Hellaine
le Blank, that was son unto Sir Bors and king Brandegoris's daughter,
and Sir Brian de Listinoise; Sir Gautere, Sir Reynold, Sir Gillemere,
were three brethren that Sir Launcelot won upon a bridge in Sir Kay's
arms. Sir Guiart le Petite, Sir Bellangere le Beuse, that was son to
the good knight Sir Alisander le Orphelin, that was slain by the
treason of king Mark. Also that traitor king slew the noble knight Sir
Tristram, as he sat harping afore his lady La Beale Isoud, with a
trenchant glaive, for whose death was much bewailing of every knight
that ever were in Arthur's days: there were never none so bewailed as
was Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak, for they were traitorously slain, Sir
Tristram by king Mark, and Sir Lamorak by Sir Gawaine and his brethren.
And this Sir Bellangere revenged the death of his father Alisander, and
Sir Tristram, slew king Mark, and La Beale Isoud died, swooning upon
the cross of Sir Tristram, whereof was great pity. And all that were
with king Mark, that were consenting to the death of Sir Tristram, were
slain, as Sir Andred, and many other. Then came Sir Hebes, Sir
Morganore, Sir Sentraile, Sir Suppinabiles, Sir Bellangere le Orgulous,
that the good knight Sir Lamorak wan in plain battle; Sir Nerovens, and
Sir Plenorius, two good knights that Sir Launcelot wan; Sir Darras, Sir
Harry le Fise Lake, Sir Erminide, brother to king Hermance for whom Sir
Palamides fought at the red city with two brethren; and Sir Selises of
the dolorous tower, Sir Edward of Orkney, and Sir Ironside, that was
called the noble knight of the red lawns, that Sir Gareth wan for the
love of dame Liones; Sir Arrok de Grevant, Sir Degrane Sance Vilany,
that fought with the giant of the black lowe; Sir Epinogris, that was
the king's son of Northumberland; Sir Pelleas, that loved the lady
Ettard, and he had died for her love, had not been one of the ladies of
the lake, her name was dame Nimue, and she wedded Sir Pelleas, and she
saved him that he was never slain, and he was a full noble knight; and
Sir Lamiel of Cardiff, that was a great lover; Sir Plaine de Force, Sir
Meleaus de Lile, Sir Bobart le Cure Hardy, that was king Arthur's son,
Sir Mador de la Porte, Sir Colgrevance, Sir Hervise de la Forest
Savage, Sir Marrok, the good knight that was betrayed with his wife,
for she made him seven year a werwolf; Sir Persant, Sir Pertilope his
brother, that was called the green knight, and Sir Perimones, brother
to them both, that was called the red knight, that Sir Gareth wan when
he was called Beaumains. All these hundred knights and ten searched Sir
Urre's wounds, by the commandment of king Arthur.


CHAPTER XII.
------------

_How Sir Launcelot was commanded by Arthur to handle his wounds, and
anon he was all whole, and how they thanked God._

Mercy, said king Arthur, where is Sir Launcelot du Lake, that he is not
here at this time? Thus as they stood and spake of many things, there
was espied Sir Launcelot, that came riding toward them, and told the
king. Peace, said the king, let no manner thing be said until he be
come to us. So when Sir Launcelot espied king Arthur he descended from
his horse, and came to the king, and saluted him, and them all. Anon as
the maid, Sir Urre's sister, saw Sir Launcelot, she ran to her brother
there as he lay in his litter, and said, Brother, here is come a knight
that my heart giveth greatly unto. Fair sister, said Sir Urre, so doth
my heart light against him, and certainly I hope now to be healed, for
my heart giveth unto him more than to all these that have searched me.
Then said king Arthur unto Sir Launcelot, Ye must do as we have done;
and told Sir Launcelot what they had done, and shewed him them all that
had searched him. Heaven defend me, said Sir Launcelot, when so many
kings and knights have assayed and failed, that I should presume upon
me to achieve that all ye my lords might not achieve. Ye shall not
choose, said king Arthur, for I will command you for to do as we all
have done. My most renowned lord, said Sir Launcelot, ye know well I
dare not nor may not disobey your commandment, but and I might or
durst, wit you well I would not take upon me to touch that wounded
knight, to that intent that I should pass all other knights; heaven
defend me from that shame. Ye take it wrong, said king Arthur, ye shall
not do it for no presumption, but for to bear us fellowship, insomuch
ye be a fellow of the Table Round, and wit you well, said king Arthur,
and ye prevail not and heal him, I dare say there is no knight in this
land may heal him, and therefore I pray you do as we have done. And
then all the kings and knights for the most part prayed Sir Launcelot
to search him, and then the wounded knight Sir Urre set him up weakly,
and prayed Sir Launcelot heartily, saying, Courteous knight, I require
thee for God's sake heal my wounds, for me thinketh, ever sithen ye
came here my wounds grieve me not. Ah my fair lord, said Sir Launcelot,
Jesu would that I might help you, I shame me sore that I should be thus
rebuked, for never was I able in worthiness to do so high a thing. Then
Sir Launcelot kneeled down by the wounded knight, saying, My lord
Arthur, I must do your commandment, the which is sore against my heart.
And then he held up his hands, and looked into the east, saying
secretly unto himself, Thou blessed Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, I
beseech thee of thy mercy, that my simple worship and honesty be saved,
and thou, blessed Trinity, thou mayest give power to heal this sick
knight, by thy great virtue and grace of thee, but, good Lord, never of
myself. And then Sir Launcelot prayed Sir Urre to let him see his head;
and then, devoutly kneeling, he ransacked the three wounds, that they
bled a little, and forthwith all the wounds fair healed, and seemed as
they had been whole a seven year. And in likewise he searched his body
of other three wounds, and they healed in likewise. And then the last
of all he searched the which was in his hand, and, anon, it healed
fair. Then king Arthur, and all the kings and knights, kneeled down,
and gave thanks and lovings unto God, and to his blessed mother, and
ever Sir Launcelot wept as he had been a child that had been beaten.
Then king Arthur let array priests and clerks in the most devoutest
manner, to bring in Sir Urre within Carlisle, with singing and loving
to God. And when this was done, the king let clothe him in the richest
manner that could be thought; and then were but few better made knights
in all the court, for he was passingly well made and bigly: and Arthur
asked Sir Urre how he felt himself. My good lord, he said, I felt
myself never so lusty. Will ye just, and do deeds of arms? said king
Arthur. Sir, said Sir Urre, and I had all that longed unto justs, I
would soon be ready.


CHAPTER XIII.
-------------

_How there was a party made of an hundred knights against an hundred
knights, and of other matters._

Then king Arthur made a party of hundred knights to be against an
hundred knights. And so, upon the morn, they justed for a diamond; but
there justed none of the dangerous knights; and so, for to shorten this
tale, Sir Urre and Sir Lavaine justed best that day, for there was none
of them but he overthrew and pulled down thirty knights; and then, by
the assent of all the kings and lords, Sir Urre and Sir Lavaine were
made knights of the Table Round. And Sir Lavaine cast his love to dame
Felelolie, Sir Urre's sister, and then they were wedded together with
great joy, and king Arthur gave to every each of them a barony of
lands. And this Sir Urre would never go from Sir Launcelot, but he, and
Sir Lavaine, awaited evermore upon him; and they were in all the court
accounted for good knights, and full desirous in arms; and many noble
deeds they did, for they would have no rest, but ever sought
adventures. Thus they lived in the court, with great nobleness and joy,
long time. But every night and day Sir Agravaine, Sir Gawaine's
brother, awaited queen Guenever and Sir Launcelot du Lake, to put them
to a rebuke and shame. And so leave I here of this tale, and overskip
great books of Sir Launcelot du Lake, what great adventures he did when
he was called Le Chevaler du Chariot. For, as the French book saith,
because of despite that knights and ladies called him the knight that
rode in the chariot, as he were judged to the gallows; therefore, in
despite of all them that named him so, he was carried in a chariot a
twelve month, for but little after that he had slain Sir Meliagrance in
the queen's quarrel, he never in a twelve month came on horseback. And,
as the French book saith, he did that twelve month more than forty
battles. And because I have lost the very matter of Le Chevaler du
Chariot, I depart from the tale of Sir Launcelot, and here I go unto
the Morte of king Arthur, and that caused Sir Agravaine.


End of the Nineteenth Book.
===========================
