The Twentieth Book.
===================

CHAPTER I.
----------

_How Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred were busy upon Sir Gawaine for to
disclose the love between Sir Launcelot and queen Guenever._

In May, when every lusty heart flourisheth and burgeneth; for as the
season is lusty to behold and comfortable, so man and woman rejoice and
gladden of summer coming with his fresh flowers: for winter, with his
rough winds and blasts, causeth a lusty man and woman to cower and sit
fast by the fire. So in this season, as in the month of May, it befell
a great anger and unhap that stinted not till the flower of chivalry of
all the world was destroyed and slain: and all was long upon two
unhappy knights, the which were named Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred
that were brethren unto Sir Gawaine. For this Sir Agravaine and Sir
Mordred had ever a privy hate unto the queen dame Guenever, and to Sir
Launcelot, and daily and nightly they ever watched upon Sir Launcelot.
So it mis-happed Sir Gawaine and all his brethren were in king Arthur's
chamber, and then Sir Agravaine said thus openly, and not in no
counsel, that many knights might hear it, I marvel that we all be not
ashamed both to see and to know how Sir Launcelot goeth with the queen,
and all we know it so, and it is shamefully suffered of us all, that we
all should suffer so noble a king as king Arthur is so to be shamed.
Then spake Sir Gawaine, and said, Brother, Sir Agravaine, I pray you,
and charge you, move no such matters no more afore me; for wit ye well,
said Sir Gawaine, I will not be of your counsel. Truly, said Sir
Gaheris and Sir Gareth, we will not be knowing, brother Agravaine, of
your deeds. Then will I, said Sir Mordred. I believe well that, said
Sir Gawaine, for ever, unto all unhappiness, brother Sir Mordred,
thereto will ye grant, and I would that ye left all this, and made you
not so busy, for I know, said Sir Gawaine, what will fall of it. Fall
of it what fall may, said Sir Agravaine, I will disclose it to the
king. Not by my counsel, said Sir Gawaine, for and there rise war and
wrake betwixt Sir Launcelot and us, wit you well, brother, there will
many kings and great lords hold with Sir Launcelot. Also, brother Sir
Agravaine, said Sir Gawaine, ye must remember how ofttimes Sir
Launcelot hath rescued the king and the queen, and the best of us all
had been full cold at the heart-root, had not Sir Launcelot been better
than we; and that hath he proved himself full oft. And as for my part,
said Sir Gawaine, I will never be against Sir Launcelot, for one day's
deed, when he rescued me from king Carados of the dolorous tower, and
slew him, and saved my life. Also, brother Sir Agravaine, and Sir
Mordred, in likewise Sir Launcelot rescued you both, and three-score
and two, from Sir Turquin. Me thinketh, brother, such kind deeds and
kindness should be remembered. Do as ye list, said Sir Agravaine, for I
will hide it no longer. With these words came to them king Arthur. Now,
brother, stint your noise, said Sir Gawaine. We will not, said Sir
Agravaine and Sir Mordred. Will ye so? said Sir Gawaine, then God speed
you, for I will not hear your tales, nor be of your counsel. No more
will I, said Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris, for we will never say evil by
that man: for because, said Sir Gareth, Sir Launcelot made me knight,
by no manner ought I to say ill of him. And therewithal they three
departed, making great dole. Alas, said Sir Gawaine and Sir Gareth, now
is this realm wholly mischieved, and the noble fellowship of the Round
Table shall be dispersed. So they departed.


CHAPTER II.
-----------

_How Sir Agravaine disclosed their love to king Arthur, and how king
Arthur gave them licence to take him._

And then Sir Arthur asked them what noise they made. My lord, said
Agravaine, I shall tell you that I may keep no longer. Here is I and my
brother, Sir Mordred, brake unto my brother Sir Gawaine, Sir Gaheris,
and to Sir Gareth, how this we know all, that Sir Launcelot holdeth
your queen, and hath done long, and we be your sister's sons, and we
may suffer it no longer; and all we wot that ye should be above Sir
Launcelot, and ye are the king that made him knight, and, therefore, we
will prove it that he is a traitor to your person. If it be so, said
Sir Arthur, wit you well he is none other, but I would be loth to begin
such a thing, but I might have proofs upon it; for Sir Launcelot is an
hardy knight, and all ye know he is the best knight among us all, and,
but if he be taken with the deed, he will fight with him that bringeth
up the noise, and I know no knight that is able to match him.
Therefore, and it be sooth as ye say, I would he were taken with the
deed. For, as the French book saith, the king was full loth thereto,
that any noise should be upon Sir Launcelot and his queen; for the king
had a deeming, but he would not hear of it, for Sir Launcelot had done
so much for him and for the queen so many times, that, wit ye well, the
king loved him passingly well. My lord, said Sir Agravaine, ye shall
ride to-morrow on hunting, and doubt ye not, Sir Launcelot will not go
with you. Then when it draweth toward night, ye may send the queen word
that ye will lie out all that night, and so may ye send for your cooks;
and then, upon pain of death, we shall take him with the queen, and
either we shall bring him to you dead or quick. I will well, said the
king, then I counsel you, said the king, take with you sure fellowship.
Sir, said Agravaine, my brother, Sir Mordred, and I will take with us
twelve knights of the Round Table. Beware, said king Arthur, for I warn
you ye shall find him wight. Let us deal, said Sir Agravaine and Sir
Mordred. So on the morn, king Arthur rode on hunting, and sent word to
the queen that he would be out all that night. Then Sir Agravaine and
Sir Mordred gat to them twelve knights, and did themselves in a
chamber, in the castle of Carlisle, and these were their names: Sir
Colgrevance, Sir Mador de la Porte, Sir Gingaline, Sir Meliot de
Logris, Sir Petipase of Winchelsea, Sir Galleron of Galway, Sir Melion
of the mountain, Sir Astamore, Sir Gromore Somir Joure, Sir Curselaine,
Sir Florence, Sir Lovel. So these twelve knights were with Sir Mordred
and Sir Agravaine. And all they were of Scotland, either of Sir
Gawaine's kin, either well willers to his brethren. So when the night
came, Sir Launcelot told Sir Bors how he would go that night, and speak
with the queen. Sir, said Sir Bors, ye shall not go this night, by my
counsel. Why? said Sir Launcelot. Sir, said Sir Bors, I dread me ever
of Sir Agravaine, that waiteth you daily, to do you shame, and us all,
and never gave my heart against no going that ever ye went to the
queen, so much as now, for I mistrust that the king is out this night
from the queen, because, peradventure, he hath lain some watch for you
and the queen, and therefore I dread me sore of treason. Have ye no
dread, said Sir Launcelot, for I shall go, and come again, and make no
tarrying. Sir, said Sir Bors, that me sore repenteth, for I dread me
sore that your going out this night shall wrath us all. Fair nephew,
said Sir Launcelot, I marvel me much why ye say thus, sithen the queen
hath sent for me, and wit ye well that I will not be so much a coward,
but she shall understand I will see her good grace. God speed you well,
said Sir Bors, and send you sound and safe again.


CHAPTER III.
------------

_How Sir Launcelot was espied in the queen's chamber, and how Sir
Agravaine and Sir Mordred came with twelve knights to slay him._

So Sir Launcelot departed, and took his sword under his arm, and so in
his mantle that noble knight put himself in great jeopardy, and so he
passed till he came to the queen's chamber. And then, as the French
book saith, there came Sir Agravaine, and Sir Mordred, with twelve
knights with them of the Round Table, and they said with crying voice,
Traitor knight, Sir Launcelot du Lake, now art thou taken. And thus
they cried with a loud voice that all the court might hear it: and they
all fourteen were armed at all points as they should fight in a battle.
Alas, said queen Guenever, now are we mischieved both. Madam, said Sir
Launcelot, is there here any armour within your chamber that I might
cover my poor body withal, and if there be any, give it me, and I shall
soon stint their malice. Truly, said the queen, I have none armour,
shield, sword, nor spear, wherefore I dread me sore our long love is
come to a mischievous end; for, I hear by their noise, there be many
noble knights, and well I wot they be surely armed, against them ye may
make no resistance; wherefore ye are likely to be slain, and then shall
I be burnt. For, and ye might escape them, said the queen, I would not
doubt but that ye would rescue me in what danger that ever I stood in.
Alas, said Sir Launcelot, in all my life was I never bested that I
should be thus shamefully slain for lack of mine armour. But ever in
one Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred cried, Traitor knight, come out of
the queen's chamber, for wit thou well thou art so beset that thou
shalt not escape. Oh mercy, said Sir Launcelot, this shameful cry and
noise I may not suffer, for better were death at once, than thus to
endure this pain. Then he took the queen in his arms, and kissed her,
and said, Most noble christian queen, I beseech you, as ye have ever
been my special good lady, and I at all times your true poor knight
unto my power, and as I never failed you in right nor in wrong, since
the first day that king Arthur made me knight, that ye will pray for my
soul if that I here be slain. For well I am well assured that Sir Bors
my nephew and all the remnant of my kin, with Sir Lavaine and Sir Urre,
that they will not fail you to rescue you from the fire, and therefore,
mine own lady, recomfort yourself whatsoever come of me, that ye go
with Sir Bors my nephew, and Sir Urre, and they all will do you all the
pleasure that they can or may, that ye shall live like a queen upon my
lands. Nay, Launcelot, said the queen, wit thou well I will never live
after thy days, but, and thou be slain, I will take my death as meekly
for Jesu Christ's sake, as ever did any Christian queen. Well, madam,
said Launcelot, sith it is so that the day is come that our love must
depart, wit you well I shall sell my life as dear as I may, and a
thousand fold, said Sir Launcelot, I am more heavier for you than for
myself. And now I had lever than to be lord of all Christendom, that I
had sure armour upon me, that men might speak of my deeds or ever I
were slain. Truly, said the queen, I would and it might please God that
they would take me and slay me, and suffer you to escape. That shall
never be, said Sir Launcelot. God defend me from such a shame, but Jesu
be thou my shield and mine armour.


CHAPTER IV.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot slew Sir Colgrevance, and armed him in his harness,
and after slew Sir Agravaine and twelve of his fellows._

And therewith Sir Launcelot wrapped his mantle about his arm well and
surely; and by then they had gotten a great form out of the hall, and
therewithal they rashed at the door. Fair lords, said Sir Launcelot,
leave your noise and your rashing, and I shall set open this door, and
then may ye do with me what it liketh you. Come off then, said they
all, and do it, for it availeth thee not to strive against us all, and
therefore let us into this chamber, and we shall save thy life until
thou come to king Arthur. Then Launcelot unbarred the door, and with
his left hand he held it open a little so that but one man might come
in at once. And so anon, there came striding a good knight, a much man
and large, and his name was Colgrevance of Gore, and he with a sword
strake at Sir Launcelot mightily, and he put aside the stroke, and gave
him such a buffet upon the helmet that he fell groveling dead within
the chamber door, and then Sir Launcelot with great might drew that
dead knight within the chamber door; and then Sir Launcelot with the
help of the queen and her ladies was lightly armed in Sir Colgrevance's
armour. And ever stood Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred, crying, Traitor
knight, come out of the queen's chamber. Leave your noise, said Sir
Launcelot unto Sir Agravaine, for wit ye well, Sir Agravaine, ye shall
not prison me this night, and therefore and ye do by my counsel, go ye
all from this chamber door, and make not such crying and such manner of
slander as ye do, for I promise you by my knighthood, and ye will
depart and make no more noise, I shall as to-morn appear before you
all, before the king, and then let it be seen which of you all, and
either else ye all, will accuse me of treason, and there I shall answer
you as a knight should, that hither I came to the queen for no manner
of mal-engine, and that will I prove and make it good upon you with
mine hands. Fie on thee traitor, said Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred, we
will have thee, maugre thy head, and slay thee if we list, for we let
thee wit, we have the choice of king Arthur, to save thee or to slay
thee. Ah sirs, said Sir Launcelot, is there none other grace with you?
then keep yourself. So then Sir Launcelot set all open the chamber
door, and mightily and knightly he strode in amongst them, and anon at
the first buffet he slew Sir Agravaine, and twelve of his fellows
within a little while after he laid them cold to the earth, for there
was none of the twelve that might stand Sir Launcelot one buffet. Also
Sir Launcelot wounded Sir Mordred, and he fled with all his might. And
then Sir Launcelot returned again unto the queen, and said, Madam, now
wit you well all our true love is brought to an end, for now will king
Arthur ever be my foe, and therefore, madam, and it like you that I may
have you with me, I shall save you from all manner adventures
dangerous. That is not best, said the queen, me seemeth now ye have
done so much harm, it will be best ye hold you still with this. And if
ye see that as to-morn they will put me unto the death, then may ye
rescue me as ye think best. I will well, said Sir Launcelot, for have
ye no doubt while I am living I shall rescue you. And then he kissed
her, and either gave other a ring, and so there he left the queen and
went until his lodging.


CHAPTER V.
----------

_How Sir Launcelot came to Sir Bors and told him how he had sped, and
in what adventure he had been, and how he escaped._

When Sir Bors saw Sir Launcelot, he was never so glad of his home
coming as he was then. Mercy, said Sir Launcelot, why be ye all armed?
What meaneth this? Sir, said Sir Bors, after that ye were departed from
us, we all that be of your blood, and your well willers, were so
troubled, that some of us lept out of our beds naked, and some in their
dreams caught naked swords in their hands, therefore, said Sir Bors, we
deem there is some great strife at hand; and then we all deemed that ye
were betrapped with some treason, and therefore we made us thus ready,
what need that ever ye were in. My fair nephew, said Sir Launcelot unto
Sir Bors, now shall ye wit all, that this night I was more harder
bested than ever I was in my life, and yet I escaped. And so he told
them all how, and in what manner, as ye have heard tofore. And
therefore my fellows, said Sir Launcelot, I pray you all that ye will
be of good heart in what need soever I stand, for now is war come to us
all. Sir, said Sir Bors, all is welcome that God sendeth us, and we
have had much weal with you and much worship, and therefore we will
take the woe with you as we have taken the weal. And therefore they
said all, there were many good knights, Look ye take no discomfort, for
there nis no band of knights under heaven but that we shall be able to
grieve them as much as they may us. And therefore discomfort not
yourself by no manner, and ye shall gather together that we love, and
that loveth us, and what that ye will have done shall be done. And
therefore, Sir Launcelot, said they, we will take the woe with the
weal. Gramercy, said Sir Launcelot, of your good comfort, for in my
great distress, my fair nephew, ye comfort me greatly, and much I am
beholden unto you. But this, my fair nephew, I would that ye did in all
haste that ye may, or it be forth-days, that ye will look in their
lodging that been lodged here nigh about the king, which will hold with
me, and which will not, for now I would know which were my friends from
my foes. Sir, said Sir Bors, I shall do my pain, and, or it be seven of
the clock, I shall wit of such as ye have said before, who will hold
with you.

Then Sir Bors called unto him Sir Lionel, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir
Blamor de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, Sir Gahalantine, Sir
Galihodin, Sir Galihud, Sir Menadeuke, with Sir Villiers the Valiant,
Sir Hebes le Renoumes, Sir Lavaine, Sir Urre of Hungary, Sir Nerouneus,
Sir Plenorius: these two knights Sir Launcelot made, and the one he wan
upon a bridge, and therefore they would never be against him. And Sir
Harry le Fise du Lake and Sir Selises of the dolorous tower, and Sir
Melias de Lile, and Sir Bellangere le Beuse, which was Sir Alisaunder's
le Orphelin's son, because his mother, dame Alis le Beale Pilgrim, and
she was kin unto Sir Launcelot, and he held with him. So there came Sir
Palamides, and Sir Safere his brother, to hold with Sir Launcelot, and
Sir Clegis of Sadok, and Sir Dinas, Sir Clarius of Cleremont. So these
two and twenty knights drew them together; and by then they were armed
on horseback, and promised Sir Launcelot to do what he would. Then
there fell to them, what of Northgalis and of Cornwall, for Sir
Lamorak's sake and for Sir Tristram's sake, to the number of a
fourscore knights.

My lords, said Sir Launcelot, wit you well I have been, ever since I
came into this country, well willed unto my lord king Arthur, and unto
my lady queen Guenever, unto my power, and this night, because my lady
the queen sent for me to speak with her, I suppose it was made by
treason, howbeit I dare largely excuse her person, notwithstanding I
was there by a forecast nigh slain, but, as God provided me, I escaped
all their malice and treason. And then that noble knight, Sir
Launcelot, told them all how he was hard bested in the queen's chamber,
and how and in what manner he escaped from them. And therefore, said
Sir Launcelot, wit you well, my fair lords, I am sure there nis but war
unto me and mine. And for because I have slain this night these
knights, I wot well as is Sir Agravaine Sir Gawaine's brother, and at
the least twelve of his fellows, for this cause now I am sure of mortal
war, for these knights were sent and ordained by king Arthur to betray
me, and therefore the king will in this heat and malice judge the queen
to the fire, and that may I not suffer, that she should be burnt for my
sake. For, and I may be heard and suffered, and so taken, I will fight
for the queen, that she is a true lady unto her lord. But the king in
his heat I dread me will not take me as I ought to be taken.


CHAPTER VI.
-----------

_Of the counsel and advice which was taken by Sir Launcelot and by his
friends for to save the queen._

My lord Sir Launcelot, said Sir Bors, by mine advice ye shall take the
woe with the weal, and take it in patience, and thank God of it. And
sithen it is fallen as it is, I counsel you keep yourself, for, and ye
will yourself, there is no fellowship of knights christened that shall
do you wrong. Also I will counsel you, my lord Sir Launcelot, that and
my lady queen Guenever be in distress, insomuch as she is in pain for
your sake, that ye knightly rescue her: and ye did other ways, all the
world will speak of you shame to the world's end, insomuch as ye were
taken with her, whether ye did right or wrong. It is now your part to
hold with the queen, that she be not slain and put to a mischievous
death, for, and she so die, the shame shall be yours. Jesu defend me
from shame, said Sir Launcelot, and keep and save my lady the queen
from villainy and shameful death, and that she never be destroyed in my
default: wherefore, my fair lords, my kin and my friends, what will ye
do? Then they said all, We will do as ye will do. I put this to you,
said Sir Launcelot, that if my lord Arthur by evil counsel will to-morn
in his heat put my lady the queen to the fire, there to be burnt,--now,
I pray you, counsel me what is best to do? Then they said all at once
with one voice, Sir, us thinketh best, that ye knightly rescue the
queen; insomuch as she shall be burnt, it is for your sake, and it is
to suppose, and ye might be handled, ye should have the same death, or
a more shamefuller death; and, sir, we say all, that ye have many times
rescued her from death for other men's quarrels, us seemeth it is more
your worship that ye rescue the queen from this peril, insomuch she
hath it for your sake.

Then Sir Launcelot stood still, and said, My fair lords, wit you well,
I would be loth to do that thing that should dishonour you or my blood,
and wit you well, I would be loth that my lady the queen should die a
shameful death, but and it be so that ye will counsel me to rescue her,
I must do much harm or I rescue her, and peradventure I shall there
destroy some of my best friends, that should much repent me: and
peradventure there be some, and they could well bring it about, or
disobey my lord king Arthur, they would soon come to me, the which I
were loth to hurt: and if so be that I rescue her, where shall I keep
her? That shall be the least care of us all, said Sir Bors: how did the
noble knight Sir Tristram by your good will? Kept not he with him La
Beale Isoud near three year in Joyous Gard, the which was done by your
elders' device, and that same place is your own, and in likewise may ye
do, and ye list, and take the queen lightly away, if it so be the king
will judge her to be burnt, and in Joyous Gard ye may keep her long
enough, until the heat of the king be past. And then shall ye bring
again the queen to the king with great worship, and then, peradventure,
ye shall have thank for her bringing home, and love and thank where
other shall have maugre. That is hard to do, said Sir Launcelot, for by
Sir Tristram I may have a warning. For when by means of treaties Sir
Tristram brought again La Beale Isoud unto king Mark from Joyous Gard,
look what befell on the end, how shamefully that false traitor king
Mark slew him as he sat harping afore his lady La Beale Isoud, with a
grounden glaive he thrust him in behind to the heart. It grieveth me,
said Sir Launcelot, to speak of his death, for all the world may not
find such a knight. All this is truth, said Sir Bors, but there is one
thing shall courage you and us all: ye know well that king Arthur and
king Mark were never like of conditions, for there was never yet man
that could prove king Arthur untrue of his promise. So, to make short
tale, they were all consented that for better or for worse, if so were
that the queen were on that morn brought to the fire, shortly they all
would rescue her. And so by the advice of Sir Launcelot they put them
all in an enbushment in a wood as nigh Carlisle as they might. And
there they abode still to wit what the king would do.


CHAPTER VII.
------------

_How Sir Mordred rode hastily to the king to tell him of the affray and
death of Sir Agravaine and the other knights._

Now turn we again unto Sir Mordred, that when he was escaped from the
noble knight Sir Launcelot, he anon gat his horse and mounted upon him,
and rode unto king Arthur, sore wounded and smitten, and all for-bled.
And there he told the king all how it was, and how they were all slain
save himself all only. Mercy, how may this be, said the king; took ye
him in the queen's chamber? Yea, truly, said Sir Mordred, there we
found him unarmed, and there he slew Colgrevance, and armed him in his
armour. And all this he told the king, from the beginning to the
ending. Ah, mercy, said the king, he is a marvellous knight of prowess.
Alas, me sore repenteth, said the king, that ever Sir Launcelot should
be against me. Now I am sure the noble fellowship of the Round Table is
broken for ever, for with him will many a noble knight hold: and now it
is fallen so, said the king, that I may not with my worship but the
queen must suffer the death. So then there was made great ordinance in
this heat, that the queen must be judged to the death. And the law was
such in those days, that whatsoever they were, of what estate or
degree, if they were found guilty of treason, there should be none
other remedy but death, and either the men or the taking with the deed
should be causer of their hasty judgment. And right so was it ordained
for queen Guenever, because Sir Mordred was escaped sore wounded, and
the death of thirteen knights of the Round Table:--these proofs and
experiences caused king Arthur to command the queen to the fire, there
to be burnt. Then spake Sir Gawaine and said: My lord Arthur, I would
counsel you not to be over hasty, but that ye would put it in respite,
this judgment of my lady the queen, for many causes. One it is, though
it were so that Sir Launcelot were found in the queen's chamber, yet it
might be that he came thither for none evil, for ye know, my lord, said
Sir Gawaine, that the queen is much beholden unto Sir Launcelot, more
than unto any other knight, for oft-times he hath saved her life, and
done battle for her when all the court refused the queen, and,
peradventure, she sent for him for goodness and for none evil, to
reward him for his good deeds that he had done to her in time past.
And, peradventure, my lady the queen sent for him to that intent that
Sir Launcelot should come to her good grace privily and secretly,
weening to her that it was best so to do, in eschewing and dreading of
slander. For oft-times we do many things that we ween it be for the
best, and yet, peradventure, it turneth to the worst. For I dare say,
said Sir Gawaine, that my lady your queen is to you both good and true.
And as for Sir Launcelot, said Sir Gawaine, I dare say he will make it
good upon any knight living that will put upon himself villainy or
shame, and in likewise he will make good for my lady dame Guenever.
That I believe well, said king Arthur, but I will not that way with Sir
Launcelot, for he trusteth so much upon his hands and his might that he
doubteth no man, and therefore for my queen he shall never fight more,
for she shall have the law. And if I may get Sir Launcelot, wit ye well
he shall have a shameful death. Jesu defend, said Sir Gawaine, that I
may never see it. Why say ye so? said king Arthur, for sooth ye have no
cause to love Sir Launcelot, for this night last past he slew your
brother Sir Agravaine, a full good knight, and also almost he had slain
your other brother Sir Mordred; and also there he slew thirteen noble
knights; and also, Sir Gawaine, remember ye he slew two sons of yours,
Sir Florence and Sir Lovel. My lord, said Sir Gawaine, of all this I
have knowledge, of whose deaths I repent me sore, but insomuch I gave
them warning, and told my brethren and my sons aforehand, what would
fall in the end, insomuch they would not do by my counsel I will not
meddle me thereof, nor revenge me nothing of their deaths, for I told
them it was no bote to strive with Sir Launcelot; howbeit I am sorry of
the death of my brethren and of my sons, for they are the causers of
their own death. For oft-times I warned my brother Sir Agravaine, and I
told him the perils the which be now fallen.


CHAPTER VIII.
-------------

_How Sir Launcelot and his kinsmen rescued the queen from the fire, and
how he slew many knights._

Then said the noble king Arthur to Sir Gawaine, Dear nephew, I pray you
make you ready in your best armour, with your brethren Sir Gaheris and
Sir Gareth, to bring my queen to the fire, there to have her judgment,
and receive the death. Nay, my most noble lord, said Sir Gawaine, that
will I never do, for, wit you well, I will never be in that place where
so noble a queen as is my lady dame Guenever shall take a shameful end.
For wit you well, said Sir Gawaine, my heart will never serve me to see
her die, and it shall never be said that even I was of your counsel of
her death. Then, said the king to Sir Gawaine, suffer your brothers Sir
Gaheris and Sir Gareth to be there. My lord, said Sir Gawaine, wit you
well they will be loth to be there present, because of many adventures
the which be like there to fall, but they are young and full unable to
say you nay. Then spake Sir Gaheris and the good knight Sir Gareth unto
Sir Arthur, Sir, ye may well command us to be there, but wit you well
it shall be sore against our will; but and we be there by your strait
commandment, ye shall plainly hold us there excused, we will be there
in peaceable wise, and bear none harness of war upon us. In the name of
God, said the king, then make you ready, for she shall soon have her
judgment anon. Alas, said Sir Gawaine, that ever I should endure to see
this woefull day. So Sir Gawaine turned him, and wept heartily, and so
he went into his chamber, and then the queen was led forth without
Carlisle, and there she was despoiled into her smock. And so then her
ghostly father was brought to her, to be shriven of her misdeeds. Then
was there weeping, and wailing, and wringing of hands, of many lords
and ladies. But there were but few in comparison that would bear any
armour for to strength the death of the queen. Then was there one that
Sir Launcelot had sent unto that place for to espy what time the queen
should go unto her death. And anon, as he saw the queen despoiled into
her smock, and so shriven, then he gave Sir Launcelot warning. Then was
there but spurring and plucking up of horses, and right so they came to
the fire, and who that stood against them, there they were slain, there
might none withstand Sir Launcelot, so all that bare arms and withstood
them, there were they slain--full many a noble knight. For there was
slain Sir Belias le Orgulous, Sir Segwarides, Sir Griflet, Sir
Brandiles, Sir Aglovale, Sir Tor, Sir Gauter, Sir Gillimer, Sir
Reynold's three brethren, Sir Damas, Sir Priamus, Sir Kay the stranger,
Sir Driant, Sir Lambegus, Sir Herminde, Sir Pertilope, Sir Perimones,
two brethren, that were called the green knight and the red knight. And
so in this rashing and hurling as Sir Launcelot thrang here and there,
it mishapped him to slay Gaheris and Sir Gareth, the noble knight, for
they were unarmed and unaware, for, as the French book saith, Sir
Launcelot smote Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris upon the brain pans, where
through they were slain in the field, howbeit in very truth Sir
Launcelot saw them not, and so were they found dead among the thickest
of the press. Then when Sir Launcelot had thus done and slain, and put
to flight all that would withstand him, then he rode straight unto dame
Guenever, and made a kirtle and a gown to be cast upon her, and then he
made her to be set behind him, and prayed her to be of good cheer. Wit
you well the queen was glad that she was escaped from the death, and
then she thanked God and Sir Launcelot. And so he rode his way with the
queen, as the French book saith, unto Joyous Gard, and there he kept
her as a noble knight should do, and many great lords and some kings
sent Sir Launcelot many good knights, and many noble knights drew unto
Sir Launcelot. When this was known openly, that king Arthur and Sir
Launcelot were at debate, and many were full heavy of their debate.


CHAPTER IX.
-----------

_Of the sorrow and lamentation of king Arthur for the death of his
nephews and other good knights, and also for the queen his wife._

So turn we again unto king Arthur, that when it was told him how, and
in what manner of wise the queen was taken away from the fire, and when
he heard of the death of his noble knights, and in especial for Sir
Gaheris' and Sir Gareth's death, then the king swooned for pure sorrow.
And when he awoke of his swoon, then he said, Alas that ever I bare
crown upon my head, for now have I lost the fairest fellowship of noble
knights that ever held Christian king together. Alas, my good knights
be slain away from me, now within these two days I have lost forty
knights, and also the noble fellowship of Sir Launcelot and his blood,
for now I may never hold them together no more with my worship. Alas,
that ever this war began. Now, fair fellows, said the king, I charge
you that no man tell Sir Gawaine of the death of his two brethren, for
I am sure, said the king, when Sir Gawaine heareth tell that Sir Gareth
is dead, he will go nigh out of his mind. Mercy, said the king, why
slew he Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris! for I dare say as for Sir Gareth he
loved Sir Launcelot above all men earthly. That is truth, said some
knights, but they were slain in the hurtling, as Sir Launcelot thrang
in the thick of the press, and as they were unarmed he smote them, and
wist not whom that he smote, and so unhappily they were slain. The
death of them, said Arthur, will cause the greatest mortal war that
ever was. I am sure, wist Sir Gawaine that Sir Gareth were slain, I
should never have rest of him till I had destroyed Sir Launcelot's kin
and himself both, or else he to destroy me; and therefore, said the
king, wit you well my heart was never so heavy as it is now, and much
more I am sorrier for my good knights' loss, than for the loss of my
fair queen, for queens I might have enow, but such a fellowship of good
knights shall never be together in no company; and now I dare say, said
king Arthur, that there was never Christian king held such a fellowship
together, and alas that ever Sir Launcelot and I should be at debate.
Ah, Agravaine, Agravaine, said the king, Jesu forgive it thy soul, for
thine evil will, that thou and thy brother Sir Mordred haddest unto Sir
Launcelot, hath caused all this sorrow. And ever among these complaints
the king wept and swooned.

Then there came one unto Sir Gawaine, and told him how the queen was
led away with Sir Launcelot, and nigh a twentyfour knights slain. O
Jesu defend my brethren, said Sir Gawaine, for full well wist I that
Sir Launcelot would rescue her, or else he would die in that field; and
to say the truth he had not been a man of worship, had he not rescued
the queen that day, in so much she should have been burnt for his sake:
and as in that, said Sir Gawaine, he hath done but knightly, and as I
would have done myself, and I had stood in like case. But where are my
brethren? said Sir Gawaine, I marvel I hear not of them. Truly, said
that man, Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris be slain. Jesu defend, said Sir
Gawaine, for all the world I would not that they were slain, and in
especial my good brother Sir Gareth. Sir, said the man, he is slain,
and that is great pity. Who slew him? said Sir Gawaine. Sir, said the
man, Launcelot slew them both. That may I not believe, said Sir
Gawaine, that he slew my brother Sir Gareth, for I dare say my brother
Gareth loved him better than me and all his brethren, and the king
both. Also I dare say, and Sir Launcelot had desired my brother Sir
Gareth with him, he would have been with him against the king and us
all, and therefore I may never believe that Sir Launcelot slew my
brother. Sir, said this man, it is noised that he slew him.


CHAPTER X.
----------

_How king Arthur at the request of Sir Gawaine concluded to make war
against Sir Launcelot, and laid siege to his castle called Joyous
Gard._

Alas, said Sir Gawaine, now is my joy gone. And then he fell down and
swooned, and long he lay there as he had been dead. And then when he
arose of his swoon, he cried out sorrowfully and said, Alas! And right
so Sir Gawaine ran to the king crying and weeping, O king Arthur, mine
uncle, my good brother Sir Gareth is slain, and so is my brother Sir
Gaheris, the which were two noble knights. Then the king wept and he
both, and so they fell on swooning. And when they were revived, then
spake Sir Gawaine, Sir, I will go see my brother Sir Gareth. Ye may not
see him, said the king, for I caused him to be interred, and Sir
Gaheris both; for I well understood that ye would make over much
sorrow, and the sight of Sir Gareth should have caused your double
sorrow. Alas, my lord, said Sir Gawaine, how slew he my brother Sir
Gareth? mine own good lord, I pray you tell me. Truly, said the king, I
shall tell you as it is told me, Sir Launcelot slew him and Sir Gaheris
both. Alas, said Sir Gawaine, they bare none arms against him, neither
of them both. I wot not how it was, said the king, but, as it is said,
Sir Launcelot slew them both in the thickest of the press, and knew
them not; and therefore let us shape a remedy for to revenge their
deaths. My king, my lord, and mine uncle, said Sir Gawaine, wit you
well, now I shall make you a promise that I shall hold by my
knighthood, that from this day I shall never fail Sir Launcelot, until
the one of us have slain the other: and therefore I require you, my
lord and king, dress you to the war, for wit you well I will be
revenged upon Sir Launcelot, and therefore, as ye will have my service
and my love, now haste you thereto, and assay your friends. For I
promise unto God, said Sir Gawaine, for the death of my brother Sir
Gareth I shall seek Sir Launcelot throughout seven kings' realms but I
shall slay him, or else he shall slay me. Ye shall not need to seek him
so far, said the king, for, as I hear say, Sir Launcelot will abide me
and you in the Joyous Gard, and much people draweth unto him as I hear
say. That may I believe, said Sir Gawaine, but my lord, he said, assay
your friends, and I will assay mine. It shall be done, said the king,
and, as I suppose, I shall be big enough to draw him out of the biggest
tower of his castle. So then the king sent letters and writs throughout
all England, both in the length and the breadth, for to assummon all
his knights. And so unto Arthur drew many knights, dukes, and earls, so
that he had a great host. And when they were assembled, the king
informed them all how Sir Launcelot had bereft him his queen. Then the
king and all his host made them ready to lay siege about Sir Launcelot,
where he lay within Joyous Gard. Thereof heard Sir Launcelot, and
purveyed him of many good knights, for with him held many knights, and
some for his own sake, and some for the queen's sake. Thus they were on
both parties well furnished and garnished of all manner of things that
longed to the war. But king Arthur's host was so big that Sir Launcelot
would not abide him in the field, for he was full loth to do battle
against the king; but Sir Launcelot drew him to his strong castle with
all manner of victual, and as many noble men as he might suffice within
the town and the castle. Then came king Arthur with Sir Gawaine, with
an huge host, and laid a siege all about Joyous Gard, both at the town
and at the castle, and there they made strong war on both parties. But
in no wise Sir Launcelot would ride out nor go out of his castle of
long time, neither he would none of his good knights to issue out,
neither none of the town nor of the castle, until fifteen weeks were
past.


CHAPTER XI.
-----------

_Of the communication between king Arthur and Sir Launcelot, and how
king Arthur reproved him._

Then it befell upon a day in harvest time, Sir Launcelot looked over
the walls, and spake on high unto king Arthur and Sir Gawaine, My lords
both, wit ye well all is in vain that ye make at this siege, for here
win ye no worship, but maugre and dishonour, for and it list me to come
myself out, and my good knights, I should full soon make an end of this
war. Come forth, said Arthur unto Launcelot, and thou darest, and I
promise thee I shall meet thee in midst of the field. God defend me,
said Sir Launcelot, that ever I should encounter with the most noble
king that made me knight. Fie upon thy fair language, said the king,
for wit you well, and trust it, I am thy mortal foe, and ever will to
my death day, for thou hast slain my good knights and full noble men of
my blood, that I shall never recover again: also thou hast dishonoured
my queen, and holden her many winters, and sithen like a traitor taken
her from me by force. My most noble lord and king, said Sir Launcelot,
ye may say what ye will, for ye wot well with yourself I will not
strive, but there as ye say I have slain your good knights, I wot well
that I have done so, and that me sore repenteth, but I was enforced to
do battle with them, in saving of my life, or else I must have suffered
them to have slain me. And as for my lady queen Guenever, except your
person of your highness, and my lord Sir Gawaine, there is no knight
under heaven that dare make it good upon me, that ever I was traitor
unto your person. And where it pleaseth you to say that I have holden
my lady your queen years and winters, unto that I shall make a large
answer, and prove it upon any knight that beareth the life, except your
person and Sir Gawaine, that my lady queen Guenever is a true lady unto
your person, as any is living unto her lord, and that will I make good
with my hands; howbeit, it hath liked her good grace to have me in
charity, and to cherish me more than any other knight, and unto my
power I again have deserved her love, for oft-times, my lord, ye have
consented that she should be burnt and destroyed in your heat, and then
it fortuned me to do battle for her, and or I departed from her
adversary they confessed their untruth, and she full worshipfully
excused. And at such times, my lord Arthur, said Sir Launcelot, ye
loved me, and thanked me when I saved your queen from the fire, and
then ye promised me for ever to be my good lord, and now me thinketh ye
reward me full ill for my good service; and, my good lord, me seemeth I
had lost a great part of my worship in my knighthood, and I had
suffered my lady your queen to have been burnt, and insomuch she should
have been burnt for my sake. For sithen I have done battles for your
queen in other quarrels than in mine own, me seemeth now I had more
right to do battle for her in right quarrel, and therefore my good and
gracious lord, said Sir Launcelot, take your queen unto your good
grace, for she is both fair, true, and good. Fie on thee, false
recreant knight, said Sir Gawaine, I let thee wit my lord mine uncle
king Arthur shall have his queen and thee, maugre thy visage, and slay
you both whether it please him. It may well be, said Sir Launcelot, but
wit ye well, my lord Sir Gawaine, and me list to come out of this
castle, ye should win me and the queen more harder than ever ye wan a
strong battle. Fie on thy proud words, said Sir Gawaine; as for my lady
the queen, I will never say of her shame, but thou false and recreant
knight, said Sir Gawaine, what cause hadst thou to slay my good brother
Sir Gareth, that loved thee more than all my kin? Alas, thou madest him
knight with thine own hands; why slewest thou him that loved thee so
well? For to excuse me, said Sir Launcelot, it helpeth me not, but by
the faith that I owe to the high order of knighthood, I should with as
good will have slain my nephew Sir Bors de Ganis at that time: but
alas, that ever I was so unhappy, said Launcelot, that I had not seen
Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris. Thou liest, recreant knight, said Sir
Gawaine, thou slewest him in despite of me: and therefore wit thou well
I shall make war to thee, and all the while that I may live. That me
repenteth, said Sir Launcelot, for well I understand it helpeth me not
to seek none accordment, while ye Sir Gawaine are so mischievously set.
And if ye were not, I would not doubt to have the good grace of my lord
Arthur. I believe it well, false recreant knight, said Sir Gawaine, for
thou hast many long days overled me, and us all, and destroyed many of
our good knights. Ye say as it pleaseth you, said Sir Launcelot, and
yet may it never be said on me and openly proved, that ever I before
cast of treason, slew no good knight, as, my lord Sir Gawaine, ye have
done. And so did I never, but in my defence, that I was driven thereto,
in saving of my life. Ah, false knight, said Sir Gawaine, that thou
meanest by Sir Lamorak: wit thou well I slew him. Ye slew him not
yourself, said Sir Launcelot, it had been over much on hand for you to
have slain him, for he was one of the best knights christened of his
age, and it was great pity of his death.


CHAPTER XII.
------------

_How the cousins and kinsmen of Sir Launcelot excited him to go out to
battle, and how they made them ready._

Well, well, said Sir Gawaine to Sir Launcelot, sithen thou upbraidest
me of Sir Lamorak, wit thou well I shall never leave thee till I have
thee at such avail that thou shalt not escape my hands. I trust you
well enough, said Sir Launcelot, and ye may get me I shall get but
little mercy. But, as the French book saith, the noble king Arthur
would have taken his queen again, and have been accorded with Sir
Launcelot, but Sir Gawaine would not suffer him by no manner of mean.
And then Sir Gawaine made many men to blow upon Sir Launcelot, and all
at once they called him False recreant knight! Then when Sir Bors de
Ganis, Sir Ector de Maris, and Sir Lionel heard this outcry, they
called to them Sir Palamides, Sir Safere's brother, and Sir Lavaine,
with many more of their blood, and all they went unto Sir Launcelot,
and said thus, My lord Sir Launcelot, wit ye well we have great scorn
of the great rebukes that we heard Gawaine say to you; wherefore we
pray you and charge you, as ye will have our service, keep us no longer
within these walls, for wit you well, plainly, we will ride into the
field, and do battle with them. For ye fare as a man that were afeard,
and for all your fair speech it will not avail you. For wit you well,
Sir Gawaine will not suffer you to be accorded with king Arthur: and
therefore fight for your life, and your right, and ye dare. Alas, said
Sir Launcelot, for to ride out of this castle and to do battle, I am
full loth. Then Sir Launcelot spake on high unto Sir Arthur and Sir
Gawaine, My lords, I require you and beseech you, sithen that I am thus
required and conjured to ride into the field, that neither you my lord
king Arthur, nor you Sir Gawaine, come not into the field. What shall
we do then? said Sir Gawaine, is this the king's quarrel with thee to
fight? and it is my quarrel to fight with thee Sir Launcelot, because
of the death of my brother Sir Gareth. Then must I needs unto battle,
said Sir Launcelot; now wit you well, my lord Arthur, and Sir Gawaine,
ye will repent it whensoever I do battle with you. And so then they
departed either from other, and then either party made them ready on
the morn for to do battle, and great purveyance was made on both sides.
And Sir Gawaine let purvey many knights for to wait upon Sir Launcelot
for to overset him, and to slay him. And on the morn at undorne Sir
Arthur was ready in the field with three great hosts, and then Sir
Launcelot's fellowship came out at three gates, in a full good array.
And Sir Lionel came in the foremost battle, and Sir Launcelot came in
the middle, and Sir Bors came out at the third gate. Thus they came in
order and rule as full noble knights. And always Sir Launcelot charged
all his knights in any wise to save king Arthur and Sir Gawaine.


CHAPTER XIII.
-------------

_How Sir Gawaine justed and smote down Sir Lionel, and how Sir
Launcelot horsed king Arthur._

Then came forth Sir Gawaine from the king's host, and he came before
and proffered to just, and Sir Lionel was a fierce knight, and lightly
he encountered with Sir Gawaine, and there Sir Gawaine smote Sir Lionel
throughout the body, that he dashed to the earth like as he had been
dead. And then Sir Ector de Maris and other more bare him into the
castle. Then began a great stoure, and much people was slain, and ever
Sir Launcelot did what he might to save the people on king Arthur's
party. For Sir Palamides, and Sir Bors, and Sir Safere overthrew many
knights, for they were deadly knights, and Sir Blamor de Ganis, and Sir
Bleoberis de Ganis, with Sir Bellangere le Beuse, these six knights did
much harm. And ever king Arthur was nigh about Sir Launcelot to have
slain him, and Sir Launcelot suffered him, and would not strike again.
So Sir Bors encountered with king Arthur, and there with a spear Sir
Bors smote him down; and so he alight and drew his sword, and said to
Sir Launcelot, Shall I make an end of this war? and that he meant to
have slain king Arthur. Not so hardy, said Sir Launcelot, upon pain of
thy head, that thou touch him no more: for I will never see that most
noble king, that made me knight, neither slain ne shamed. And
therewithal Sir Launcelot alight off his horse, and took up the king,
and horsed him again, and said thus, My lord Arthur, for God's love
stint this strife, for ye get here no worship and I would do mine
utterance, but always I forbear you, and ye, nor none of yours,
forbeareth me: my lord remember what I have done in many places, and
now I am evil rewarded.

Then when king Arthur was on horseback, he looked upon Sir Launcelot,
and then the tears brast out of his eyes, thinking on the great
courtesy that was in Sir Launcelot, more than in any other man. And
therewith the king rode his way, and might no longer behold him, and
said, Alas, that ever this war began! And then either parties of the
battles withdrew them to repose them, and buried the dead, and to the
wounded men they laid soft salves, and thus they endured that night
till on the morn, and on the morn by undorne they made them ready to do
battle. And then Sir Bors led the forward. So upon the morn there came
Sir Gawaine as brim as any boar, with a great spear in his hand, and
when Sir Bors saw him, he thought to revenge his brother Sir Lionel of
the despite that Sir Gawaine did him the other day. And so they that
knew either other feutered their spears, and with all their mights of
their horses and themselves they met together so felonously that either
bare other through, and so they fell both to the earth; and then the
battles joined, and there was much slaughter on both parties. Then Sir
Launcelot rescued Sir Bors, and sent him into the castle. But neither
Sir Gawaine nor Sir Bors died not of their wounds; for they were all
holpen. Then Sir Lavaine and Sir Urre prayed Sir Launcelot to do his
pain, and fight as they had done:--For we see ye forbear and spare, and
that doth much harm, therefore we pray you spare not your enemies no
more than they do you. Alas, said Sir Launcelot, I have no heart to
fight against my lord Arthur, for ever me seemeth I do not as I ought
to do. My lord, said Sir Palamides, though ye spare them all this day
they will never give you thank; and if they may get you at avail ye are
but dead. So then Sir Launcelot understood that they said him truth,
and then he strained himself more than he did aforehand, and because
his nephew Sir Bors was sore wounded. And then within a little while,
by even-song time, Sir Launcelot and his party better stood, for their
horses went in blood past the fetlocks, there was so much people slain.
And then, for pity, Sir Launcelot withheld his knights, and suffered
king Arthur's party for to withdraw them on side. And then Sir
Launcelot's party withdrew them into his castle, and either party
buried the dead bodies and put salve unto the wounded men. So when Sir
Gawaine was hurt, they on king Arthur's party were not so orgulous as
they were toforehand to do battle. Of this war was noised through all
Christendom, and at the last it was noised afore the Pope; and he
considering the great goodness of king Arthur and of Sir Launcelot,
that was called the most noblest knights of the world, wherefore the
Pope called unto him a noble clerk, that at that time was there
present,--the French book saith it was the bishop of Rochester--and the
Pope gave him bulls under lead unto king Arthur of England, charging
him upon pain of interdicting of all England, that he take his queen
dame Guenever unto him again, and accord with Sir Launcelot.


CHAPTER XIV.
------------

_How the pope sent down his bulls to make peace, and how Sir Launcelot
brought the queen to king Arthur._

So when this bishop was come to Carlisle he shewed the king these
bulls. And when the king understood these bulls, he nist what to do:
full fain he would have been accorded with Sir Launcelot, but Sir
Gawaine would not suffer him; but as for to have the queen, thereto he
agreed. But in no wise Sir Gawaine would not suffer the king to accord
with Sir Launcelot, but as for the queen he consented. And then the
bishop had of the king his great seal, and his assurance, as he was a
true anointed king, that Sir Launcelot should come safe and go safe,
and that the queen should not be spoken unto, of the king, nor of none
other, for no thing done afore time past. And of all these appointments
the bishop brought with him sure assurance and writing, to shew Sir
Launcelot. So when the bishop was come to Joyous Gard, there he shewed
Sir Launcelot how the Pope had written to Arthur and unto him, and
there he told him the perils if he withheld the queen from the king. It
was never in my thought, said Launcelot, to withhold the queen from my
lord Arthur; but in so much she should have been dead for my sake, me
seemeth it was my part to save her life, and put her from that danger
till better recover might come. And now I thank God, said Sir
Launcelot, that the Pope hath made her peace; for God knoweth, said Sir
Launcelot, I will be a thousand fold more gladder to bring her again
than ever I was of her taking away,--with this, I may be sure to come
safe and go safe, and that the queen shall have her liberty as she had
before, and never for no thing that hath been surmised afore this time,
she never from this day stand in no peril; for else, said Sir
Launcelot, I dare adventure me to keep her from an harder shower than
ever I kept her. It shall not need you, said the bishop, to dread so
much: for wit you well the Pope must be obeyed; and it were not the
Pope's worship nor my poor honesty to wit you distressed, neither the
queen, neither in peril nor shamed. And then he shewed Sir Launcelot
all his writing, both from the Pope and from king Arthur. This is sure
enough, said Sir Launcelot, for full well I dare trust my lord's own
writing and his seal, for he was never shamed of his promise.

Therefore, said Sir Launcelot unto the bishop, ye shall ride unto the
king afore, and recommand me unto his good grace, and let him have
knowledging that this same day eight days, by the grace of God, I
myself shall bring my lady queen Guenever unto him. And then say ye
unto my most redoubted king, that I will say largely for the queen,
that I shall none except for dread, nor fear, but the king himself, and
my lord Sir Gawaine, and that is more for the king's love than for
himself. So the bishop departed, and came to the king at Carlisle, and
told him all how Sir Launcelot answered him: and then the tears brast
out of the king's eyes. Then Sir Launcelot purveyed him an hundred
knights, and all were clothed in green velvet, and their horses trapped
to their heels, and every knight held a branch of olive in his hand in
tokening of peace, and the queen had four and twenty gentlewomen
following her in the same wise, and Sir Launcelot had twelve coursers
following him, and on every courser sat a young gentleman, and all they
were arrayed in green velvet, with sarpis of gold about their quarters,
and the horse trapped in the same wise down to the heels with many
ouches, set with stones and pearls in gold, to the number of a
thousand; and she and Sir Launcelot were clothed in white cloth of gold
tissue, and right so as ye have heard, as the French book maketh
mention, he rode with the queen from Joyous Gard to Carlisle, and so
Sir Launcelot rode throughout Carlisle, and so in the castle, that all
men might behold and wit you well there was many a weeping eye. And
then Sir Launcelot himself alight, and avoided his horse, and took the
queen, and so led her where king Arthur was in his seat, and Sir
Gawaine sat afore him, and many other great lords. So when Sir
Launcelot saw the king and Sir Gawaine, then he led the queen by the
arm, and then he kneeled down, and the queen both. Wit you well, then
was there many bold knights there with king Arthur that wept as
tenderly as though they had seen all their kin afore them. So the king
sat still, and said no word. And when Sir Launcelot saw his
countenance, he arose and pulled up the queen with him, and thus he
spake full knightly:--


CHAPTER XV.
-----------

_Of the deliverance of the queen to the king by Sir Launcelot, and what
language Sir Gawaine had to Sir Launcelot._

My most redoubted king, ye shall understand, by the Pope's commandment,
and yours, I have brought to you my lady the queen, as right requireth;
and if there be any knight, of whatsoever degree that he be, except
your person, that will say or dare say but that she is true to you, I
here myself, Sir Launcelot du Lake, will make it good upon his body
that she is a true lady unto you: but liars ye have listened, and that
has caused debate betwixt you and me. For time hath been, my lord
Arthur, that ye have been greatly pleased with me, when I did battle
for my lady your queen; and full well ye know my most noble king, that
she hath been put to great wrong or this time, and sithen it pleased
you at many times that I should fight for her, me seemeth, my good
lord, I had more cause to rescue her from the fire, insomuch she should
have been burnt for my sake. For they that told you those tales were
liars, and so it fell upon them. For, by likelihood, had not the might
of God been with me, I might never have endured fourteen knights, and
they armed and afore purposed, and I unarmed and not purposed; for I
was sent for unto my lady your queen, I wot not for what cause, but I
was not so soon within the chamber door, but anon Sir Agravaine and Sir
Mordred called me traitor and recreant knight. They called thee right,
said Sir Gawaine. My lord Sir Gawaine, said Sir Launcelot, in their
quarrel they proved themselves not in the right. Well, well, Sir
Launcelot, said king Arthur, I have given thee no cause to do to me as
thou hast done, for I have worshipped thee and thine more than any of
all my knights. My good lord, said Sir Launcelot, so ye be not
displeased, ye shall understand I and mine have done you oft better
service than any other knights have done in many divers places; and
where ye have been full hard bested divers times, I have myself rescued
you from many dangers, and ever unto my power I was glad to please you,
and my lord Sir Gawaine both, in justs and tournaments, and in battles
set, both on horseback and on foot, I have often rescued you, and my
lord Sir Gawaine, and many more of your knights in many divers places.
For now I will make avaunt, said Sir Launcelot, I will that ye all wit
that yet I found never no manner of knight, but that I was over-hard
for him, and I had done my utterance, thanked be God; howbeit I have
been matched with good knights, as Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak, but
ever I had a favour unto them, and a deeming what they were; and I take
God to record, said Sir Launcelot, I never was wroth nor greatly heavy
with no good knight, and I saw him busy about to win worship: and full
glad I was ever when I found any knight that might endure me on
horseback and on foot. Howbeit, Sir Carados of the dolorous tower was a
full noble knight, and a passing strong man, and that wot ye, my lord
Sir Gawaine; for he might well be called a noble knight, when he by
fine force pulled you out of your saddle, and bound you overthwart
afore him to his saddle bow; and there, my lord Sir Gawaine, I rescued
you, and slew him afore your sight. Also I found his brother, Sir
Turquin, in like wise leading Sir Gaheris your brother bounden afore
him, and there I rescued your brother, and slew that Sir Turquin, and
delivered threescore and four of my lord Arthur's knights out of his
prison. And now I dare say, said Sir Launcelot, I met never with so
strong knights, nor so well fighting, as was Sir Carados and Sir
Turquin, for I fought with them to the uttermost; and therefore, said
Sir Launcelot unto Sir Gawaine, me seemeth ye ought of right for to
remember this: for and I might have your good will, I would trust to
God to have my lord Arthur's good grace.


CHAPTER XVI.
------------

_Of the communication between Sir Gawaine and Sir Launcelot, with much
other language._

The king may do as he will, said Sir Gawaine, but wit thou well, Sir
Launcelot, thou and I shall never be accorded while we live, for thou
hast slain three of my brethren, and twain of them ye slew traitorly
and piteously, for they bare none harness against thee, nor none would
bear. God would they had been armed, said Sir Launcelot, for then had
they been on live. And wit ye well, Sir Gawaine, as for Sir Gareth, I
love none of my kinsmen so much as I did him, and ever while I live,
said Sir Launcelot, I will bewail Sir Gareth's death, not all only for
the great fear that I have of you, but many causes causen me to be
sorrowful. One is, for I made him knight; another is, I wot well he
loved me above all other knights; and the third is, he was passing
noble, true, courteous, and gentle, and well conditioned; the fourth
is, I wist well, anon as I heard that Sir Gareth was dead, I should
never after have your love, but everlasting war betwixt us; and also I
wist well that ye would cause my noble lord Arthur for ever to be my
mortal foe, and as Jesu be my help, said Sir Launcelot, I slew never
Sir Gareth nor Sir Gaheris by my will, but alas, that ever they were
unarmed that unhappy day. But thus much I shall offer me, said Sir
Launcelot, if it may please the king's good grace, and you, my lord Sir
Gawaine: I shall first begin at Sandwich, and there I shall go in my
shirt, barefoot, and at every ten miles end I will found, and cause to
make an house of religion, of what order that ye will assign me, with
an whole convent to sing and read day and night in especial for Sir
Gareth's sake and Sir Gaheris. And this shall I perform from Sandwich
unto Carlisle; and every house shall have sufficient livelihood, and
this shall I perform while I have any livelihood in Christendom, and
there is none of all these religious places, but they shall be
performed, furnished and garnished in all things as an holy place ought
to be, I promise you faithfully. And this, Sir Gawaine, me thinketh
were more fairer, holier, and more better to their souls, than ye my
most noble king, and you, Sir Gawaine, to war upon me, for thereby
shall ye get none avail. Then all knights and ladies that were there
wept as they were mad, and the tears fell on king Arthur's cheeks. Sir
Launcelot, said Sir Gawaine, I have right well heard thy speech, and
thy great proffers, but wit thou well, let the king do as it pleaseth
him, I will never forgive my brothers' death, and in especial the death
of my brother Sir Gareth: and if mine uncle, king Arthur, will accord
with thee, he shall lose my service: for wit thou well, thou art both
false to the king and to me. Sir, said Sir Launcelot, he beareth not
the life that may make that good, and if that ye, Sir Gawaine, will
charge me with so high a thing, ye must pardon me, for then needs must
I answer you. Nay, said Sir Gawaine, we are past that at this time, and
that caused the Pope, for he hath charged mine uncle the king, that he
shall take his queen again, and to accord with thee, Sir Launcelot, as
for this season, and therefore thou shalt go safe, as thou camest. But
in this land thou shalt not abide past fifteen days, such summons I
give you;--so the king and we were consented and accorded, or thou
camest hither; and else, said Sir Gawaine, wit thou well, that thou
shouldest not have come here, but if it were maugre thy head. And if it
were not for the Pope's commandment, said Sir Gawaine, I should do
battle with mine own body against thy body, and prove it upon thee that
thou hast been both false unto mine uncle king Arthur, and to me both,
and that shall I prove upon thy body when thou art departed from hence,
wheresoever I find thee.


CHAPTER XVII.
-------------

_How Sir Launcelot departed from the king and from Joyous Gard over
seaward, and what knights went with him._

Then Sir Launcelot sighed, and therewith the tears fell on his cheeks,
and then he said thus: Alas, most noble christian realm, whom I have
loved above all other realms, and in thee have I gotten a great part of
my worship, and now I shall depart in this wise. Truly me repenteth
that ever I came in this realm that should be thus shamefully banished,
undeserved and causeless. But fortune is so variant, and the wheel so
movable, there is no constant abiding, and that may be proved by many
old chronicles of noble Hector, and Troilus, and Alisander the mighty
conqueror, and many other more. When they were most in their royalty,
they alight lowest; and so fareth by me, said Sir Launcelot, for in
this realm I had worship, and by me and mine all the whole Round Table
hath been increased more in worship by me and my blood than by any
other. And therefore wit thou well, Sir Gawaine, I may live upon my
lands as well as any knight that here is. And if ye, most redoubted
king, will come upon my lands with Sir Gawaine, to war upon me, I must
endure you as well as I may. But as to you, Sir Gawaine, if that ye
come there, I pray you charge me not with treason nor felony, for, and
ye do, I must answer you. Do thou thy best, said Sir Gawaine, therefore
hie thee fast that thou were gone, and wit thou well we shall soon come
after, and break the strongest castle that thou hast upon thy head.
That shall not need, said Sir Launcelot, for and I were as orgulous set
as ye are, wit ye well I should meet with you in midst of the field.
Make thou no more language, said Sir Gawaine, but deliver the queen
from thee, and pike thee lightly out of this court. Well, said Sir
Launcelot, and I had wist of this short coming, I would have advised me
twice or that I had come hither; for and the queen had been so dear to
me as ye noise her, I durst have kept her from the fellowship of the
best knights under heaven. And then Sir Launcelot said unto Guenever,
in hearing of the king and them all, Madam, now I must depart from you
and this noble fellowship for ever; and sithen it is so, I beseech you
to pray for me, and say me well, and if ye be hard bestad by any false
tongues, lightly, my lady, let send me word, and if any knight's hands
may deliver you by battle, I shall deliver you. And therewithal Sir
Launcelot kissed the queen, and then he said all openly, Now let see
what he be in this place, that dare say the queen is not true unto my
lord Arthur: let see who will speak, and he dare speak. And therewith
he brought the queen to the king, and then Sir Launcelot took his leave
and departed; and there was neither king, duke ne earl, baron ne
knight, lady nor gentlewoman, but all they wept as people out of their
mind, except Sir Gawaine; and when the noble Sir Launcelot took his
horse, to ride out of Carlisle, there was sobbing and weeping for pure
dole of his departing; and so he took his way unto Joyous Gard, and
then ever after he called it the Dolorous Gard. And thus departed Sir
Launcelot from the court for ever. And so when he came to Joyous Gard,
he called his fellowship unto him, and asked them what they would do.
Then they answered all wholly together with one voice, they would as he
would do. My fair fellows, said Sir Launcelot, I must depart out of
this most noble realm, and now I shall depart it grieveth me sore, for
I shall depart with no worship. For a banished man departed never out
of no realm with no worship, and that is my heaviness, for ever I fear
after my days that they shall chronicle upon me that I was banished out
of this land; and else, my fair lords, be ye sure, and I had not dread
shame, my lady queen Guenever and I should never have departed. Then
spake many noble knights, as Sir Palamides, Sir Safir his brother, and
Sir Bellangere le Beuse, and Sir Urre with Sir Lavaine, with many
other, Sir, and ye be so disposed to abide in this country, we will
never fail you; and if ye list not to abide in this land, there is none
of the good knights that here be will fail you, for many causes. One
is, all we that be not of your blood shall never be welcome to the
court. And sithen it liked us to take a part with you in your distress
and heaviness in this realm, wit you well it shall like us as well to
go in other countries with you, and there to take such part as ye do.
My fair lords, said Sir Launcelot, I well understand you, and, as I
can, thank you: and ye shall understand such livelihood as I am born
unto I shall depart with you, in this manner of wise, that is for to
say, I shall depart all my livelihood and all my lands freely among
you, and I myself will have as little as any of you, for have I
sufficient that may long to my person, I will ask none other rich
array; and I trust to God to maintain you on my lands as well as ever
were maintained any knights. Then spake all the knights at once, He
have shame that will leave you; for we all understand in this realm
will be now no quiet, but ever strife and debate, now the fellowship of
the Round Table is broken; for by the noble fellowship of the Round
Table was king Arthur upborne, and by their nobleness the king and all
his realm was in quiet and in rest. And a great part, they said all,
was because of your nobleness.


CHAPTER XVIII.
--------------

_How Sir Launcelot passed over the sea, and how he made great lords of
the knights that went with him._

Truly, said Sir Launcelot, I thank you all of your good saying,
howbeit, I wot well, in me was not all the stability of this realm. But
in that I might I did my devoir, and well, I am sure, I knew many
rebellions in my days that by me were appeased; and I trow we all shall
hear of them in short space, and that me sore repenteth. For ever I
dread me, said Sir Launcelot, that Sir Mordred will make trouble, for
he is passing envious, and applieth him to trouble. So they were
accorded to go with Sir Launcelot to his lands. And to make short tale,
they trussed, and paid all that would ask them. And wholly an hundred
knights departed with Sir Launcelot at once, and made their avows they
would never leave him for weal nor for woe; and so they shipped at
Cardiff, and sailed unto Benwick: some men call it Bayonne, and some
men call it Beaume, where the wine of Beaume is. But to say the sooth,
Sir Launcelot and his nephews were lords of all France, and of all the
lands that longed unto France, he and his kindred rejoiced it all
through Sir Launcelot's noble prowess. And then Sir Launcelot stuffed
and furnished and garnished all his noble towns and castles. Then all
the people of those lands came unto Sir Launcelot on foot and hands.
And so when he had established all these countries, he shortly called a
parliament; and there he crowned Sir Lionel king of France; and Sir
Bors he crowned him king of all king Claudas' lands; and Sir Ector de
Maris, that was Sir Launcelot's youngest brother, he crowned him king
of Benwick, and also king of all Guienne, that was Sir Launcelot's own
land. And he made Sir Ector prince of them all, and thus he departed.
Then Sir Launcelot advanced all his noble knights, and first he
advanced them of his blood; that was Sir Blamor he made him duke of
Limosin in Guienne, and Sir Bleoberis he made him duke of Poictiers,
and Sir Gahalantin he made him duke of Querne, and Sir Galihodin he
made him duke of Sentonge, and Sir Galihud he made him earl of Perigot,
and Sir Menadeuke he made him earl of Roerge, and Sir Villiers the
valiant he made him earl of Bearn, and Sir Hebes le Renoumes he made
him earl of Comange, and Sir Lavaine he made him earl of Arminak, and
Sir Urre he made him earl of Estrake, and Sir Neroneus he made him earl
of Pardiak, and Sir Plenorius he made him earl of Foise, and Sir
Selises of the dolorous tower he made him earl of Masauke, and sir
Melias de Lile he made him earl of Tursauk, and Sir Bellangere le Bewse
he made him earl of the Landes, and Sir Palamides he made him duke of
the Provence, and Sir Safir he made him duke of Langedok, and Sir
Clegis he gave him the earldom of Agente, and Sir Sadok he gave him the
earldom of Surlat, and Sir Dinas le seneschal he made him duke of
Anjou, and Sir Clarrus he made him duke of Normandy. Thus Sir Launcelot
rewarded his noble knights, and many more, that me seemeth it were too
long to rehearse.


CHAPTER XIX.
------------

_How king Arthur and Sir Gawaine made a great host ready to go over sea
to make war on Sir Launcelot._

So leave we Sir Launcelot in his lands, and his noble knights with him,
and return we again unto king Arthur and to Sir Gawaine, that made a
great host ready, to the number of threescore thousand, and all thing
was made ready for their shipping to pass over the sea; and so they
shipped at Cardiff. And there king Arthur made Sir Mordred chief ruler
of all England, and also he put queen Guenever under his governance;
because Sir Mordred was king Arthur's son, he gave him the rule of his
land, and of his wife, and so king Arthur passed over the sea and
landed upon Sir Launcelot's lands, and there he burnt and wasted,
through the vengeance of Sir Gawaine, all that they might overrun. When
this word came to Sir Launcelot, that king Arthur and Sir Gawaine were
landed upon his lands, and made a full destruction and waste, then
spake Sir Bors and said, My lord Sir Launcelot, it is shame that we
suffer them thus to ride over our lands, for wit you well, suffer ye
them as long as ye will, they will do you no favour, and they may
handle you. Then said Sir Lionel, that was ware and wise, My lord Sir
Launcelot, I will give you this counsel, let us keep our strong walled
towns until they have hunger and cold, and blow on their nails, and
then let us freshly set upon them, and shred them down as sheep in a
field, that aliens may take ensample for ever how they land upon our
lands. Then spake king Bagdemagus to Sir Launcelot, Sir, your courtesy
will shend us all, and thy courtesy hath waked all this sorrow: for,
and they thus over our lands ride, they shall by process bring us all
to nought, whilst we thus in holes us hide. Then said Sir Galihud unto
Sir Launcelot, Sir, here be knights come of kings' blood that will not
long droop, and they are within these walls, therefore give us leave,
like as we be knights, to meet them in the field, and we shall slay
them, that they shall curse the time that ever they came into this
country. Then spake seven brethren of North Wales, and they were seven
noble knights, a man might seek in seven lands or he might find such
seven knights: then they all said at once, Sir Launcelot, let us out
ride with Sir Galihud, for we be never wont to cower in castles nor in
noble towns. Then spake Sir Launcelot, that was master and governor of
them all, My fair lords, wit you well I am full loth to ride out with
my knights, for shedding of christian blood; and yet my lands I
understand be full bare to sustain any host a while, for the mighty
wars that whilom made king Claudus upon this country, upon my father
king Ban, and on mine uncle king Bors; howbeit we will as at this time
keep our strong walls, and I shall send a messager unto my lord Arthur,
a treaty for to take, for better is peace than always war. So Sir
Launcelot sent forth a damsel, and a dwarf with her, requiring king
Arthur to leave his warring upon his lands, and so she start upon a
palfrey, and the dwarf ran by her side. And when she came to the
pavilion of king Arthur, there she alight, and there met her a gentle
knight Sir Lucan the butler, and said, Fair damsel, come ye from Sir
Launcelot du Lake? Yea, sir, she said, therefore I come hither to speak
with my lord the king. Alas, said Sir Lucan, my lord Arthur would love
Launcelot, but Sir Gawaine will not suffer him. And then he said, I
pray to God, damsel, ye may speed well, for all we that be about the
king would that Sir Launcelot did best of any knight living. And so
with this Lucan led the damsel unto the king, where he sat with Sir
Gawaine for to hear what she would say. So when she had told her tale,
the water ran out of the king's eyes, and all the lords were full glad
for to advise the king as to be accorded with Sir Launcelot, save all
only Sir Gawaine, and he said, My lord, mine uncle, what will ye do?
will ye now turn again, now ye are past thus far upon this journey? all
the world will speak of you villainy. Nay, said Arthur, wit thou well,
Sir Gawaine, I will do as ye will advise me; and yet me seemeth, said
Arthur, his fair proffers were not good to be refused: but sithen I am
comen so far upon this journey, I will that ye give the damsel her
answer, for I may not speak to her for pity, for her proffers be so
large.


CHAPTER XX.
-----------

_What message Sir Gawaine sent to Sir Launcelot, and king Arthur laid
siege to Benwick, and other matters._

Then Sir Gawaine said to the damsel thus: Damsel, say ye to Sir
Launcelot, that it is waste labour, now to sue to mine uncle. For tell
him, and he would have made any labour for peace, he should have made
it or this time: for tell him now it is too late. And say, that I, Sir
Gawaine, so send him word, that I promise him, by the faith I owe unto
God, and to knighthood, I shall never leave him till he have slain me,
or I him. So the damsel wept and departed, and there were many weeping
eyes: and so Sir Lucan brought the damsel to her palfrey, and so she
came to Sir Launcelot, where he was among all his knights; and when Sir
Launcelot had heard this answer, then the tears ran down by his cheeks.
And then his noble knights strode about him, and said, Sir Launcelot,
wherefore make ye such cheer: think what ye are, and what men we are,
and let us noble knights match them in midst of the field. That may be
lightly done, said Sir Launcelot, but I was never so loth to do battle,
and therefore, I pray you, fair sirs, as ye love me, be ruled as I will
have you, for I will always flee that noble king that made me knight.
And when I may no farther, I must needs defend me, and that will be
more worship for me, and us all, than to compare with that noble king
whom we have all served. Then they held their language, and as that
night they took their rest. And upon the morn, early, in the dawning of
the day, as knights looked out, they saw the city of Benwick besieged
round about, and fast they began to set up ladders. And then they
defied them out of the town, and beat them from the walls mightily.
Then came forth Sir Gawaine, well armed, upon a stiff steed, and he
came before the chief gate with his spear in his hand, crying, Sir
Launcelot, where art thou, is there none of you proud knights dare
break a spear with me? Then Sir Bors made him ready, and came forth out
of the town, and there Sir Gawaine encountered with Sir Bors; and at
that time he smote Sir Bors down from his horse, and almost he had
slain him, and so Sir Bors was rescued, and borne into the town. Then
came forth Sir Lionel, brother to Sir Bors, and thought to revenge him,
and either feutred their spears, and ran together, and there they met
spitefully, but Sir Gawaine had such grace that he smote Sir Lionel
down, and wounded him there passing sore, and then Sir Lionel was
rescued, and borne into the town. And this Sir Gawaine came every day,
and he failed not, but that he smote down one knight or other. So thus
they endured half a year, and much slaughter was of people on both
parties. Then it befell upon a day, Sir Gawaine came before the gates
armed at all pieces, on a noble horse, with a great spear in his hand,
and then he cried with a loud voice, Where art thou now, thou false
traitor. Sir Launcelot? Why hidest thou thyself within holes and walls
like a coward? Look out now, thou false traitor knight, and here I
shall revenge upon thy body the death of my three brethren. All this
language heard Sir Launcelot every deal, and his kin and his knights
drew about him, and all they said at once to Sir Launcelot, Sir
Launcelot, now must ye defend you like a knight, or else ye be shamed
for ever: for now ye be called upon treason, it is time for you to
stir, for ye have slept over long, and suffered over much. So God me
help, said Sir Launcelot, I am right heavy of Sir Gawaine's words, for
now he charged me with a great charge; and therefore I wot it as well
as ye, that I must defend me, or else to be recreant. Then Sir
Launcelot bade saddle his strongest horse, and bad let fetch his arms,
and bring all unto the gate of the tower. And then Sir Launcelot spake
on high unto king Arthur, and said, My lord Arthur, and noble king that
made me knight, wit you well I am right heavy for your sake, that ye
thus sue upon me, and always I forbear you, for, and I would have been
vengeable, I might have met you in midst of the field, and there to
have made your boldest knights full tame: and now I have forborne half
a year, and suffered you and Sir Gawaine to do what ye would do, and
now I may endure it no longer, now must I needs defend myself, insomuch
Sir Gawaine hath appealed me of treason,--the which is greatly against
my will, that ever I should fight against any of your blood; but now I
may not forsake it, I am driven thereto as a beast till a bay. Then Sir
Gawaine said, Sir Launcelot, and thou darest do battle, leave thy
babbling and come off, and let us ease our hearts. Then Sir Launcelot
armed him lightly, and mounted upon his horse. And either of the
knights gat great spears in their hands, and the host without stood
still all apart, and the noble knights came out of the city by a great
number, insomuch that when Arthur saw the number of men and knights he
marvelled, and said to himself, Alas, that ever Sir Launcelot was
against me, for now I see he hath forborne me. And so the covenant was
made, there should no man nigh them, nor deal with them, till the one
were dead or yielden.


CHAPTER XXI.
------------

_How Sir Gawaine and Sir Launcelot did battle together, and how Sir
Gawaine was overthrown and hurt._

Then Sir Gawaine and Sir Launcelot departed a great way in sunder, and
then they came together with all their horses' might as they might run,
and either smote other in midst of their shields, but the knights were
so strong, and their spears so big, that their horses might not endure
their buffets, and so the horses fell to the earth. And then they
avoided their horses, and dressed their shields afore them. Then they
stood together, and gave many sad strokes on divers places of their
bodies, that the blood brast out on many sides and places. Then had Sir
Gawaine such a grace and gift that an holy man had given to him, that
every day in the year, from underne till high noon, his might increased
those three hours, as much as thrice his strength, and that caused Sir
Gawaine to win great honour. And for his sake king Arthur made an
ordinance that all manner of battles for any quarrels that should be
done before king Arthur, should begin at underne, and all was done for
Sir Gawaine's love, that by likelihood if that Sir Gawaine were on the
one part he should have the better in battle, while his strength
endured three hours, but there were but few knights that time living
that knew this advantage that Sir Gawaine had, but king Arthur all
only. Thus Sir Launcelot fought with Sir Gawaine, and when Sir
Launcelot felt his might evermore increase, Sir Launcelot wondered, and
dread him sore to be shamed. For, as the French book saith, Sir
Launcelot wend, when he felt Sir Gawaine double his strength, that he
had been a fiend and no earthly man, wherefore Sir Launcelot traced and
traversed, and covered himself with his shield, and kept his might and
his braid during three hours: and that while Sir Gawaine gave him many
sad brunts and many sad strokes, that all the knights that beheld Sir
Launcelot marvelled how he might endure him, but full little understood
they that travail that Sir Launcelot had for to endure him. And then
when it was past noon, Sir Gawaine had no more but his own might. Then
Sir Launcelot felt him so come down; then he stretched him up, and
stood near Sir Gawaine, and said thus, My lord Sir Gawaine, now I feel
ye have done, now my lord Sir Gawaine I must do my part, for many great
and grievous strokes I have endured you this day with great pain. Then
Sir Launcelot doubled his strokes, and gave Sir Gawaine such a buffet
on the helmet, that he fell down on his side, and Sir Launcelot
withdrew him from him. Why withdrawest thou thee? said Sir Gawaine; now
turn again, false traitor knight, and slay me; for and thou leave me
thus, when I am whole I shall do battle with thee again.--I shall
endure you, sir, by God's grace, but wit thou well, Sir Gawaine, I will
never smite a felled knight. And so Sir Launcelot went into the city,
and Sir Gawaine was borne into one of king Arthur's pavilions, and
leeches were brought to him, and searched and salved with soft
ointments. And then Sir Launcelot said, Now have good day, my lord the
king, for, wit you well, ye win no worship at these walls; and if I
would my knights out bring, there should many a man die. Therefore, my
lord Arthur, remember you of old kindness, and however I fare Jesu be
your guide in all places.


CHAPTER XXII.
-------------

_Of the sorrow that king Arthur made for the war, and of another battle
where also Sir Gawaine had the worse._

Alas, said the king, that ever this unhappy war was begun, for ever Sir
Launcelot forbeareth me in all places, and in likewise my kin, and that
is seen well this day by my nephew Sir Gawaine. Then king Arthur fell
sick for sorrow of Sir Gawaine, that he was sore hurt, and because of
the war betwixt him and Sir Launcelot. So then they on king Arthur's
party kept the siege with little war withoutforth, and they withinforth
kept their walls, and defended them when need was. Thus Sir Gawaine lay
sick about three weeks in his tents, with all manner of leech-craft
that might be had: and as soon as Sir Gawaine might go and ride, he
armed him at all points, and start upon a courser, and gat a spear in
his hand, and so he came riding afore the chief gate of Benwick, and
there he cried on high, Where art thou, Sir Launcelot? come forth thou
false traitor knight, and recreant, for I am here, Sir Gawaine, will
prove this that I say on thee. All this language Sir Launcelot heard,
and then he said thus, Sir Gawaine, me repenteth of your foul saying,
that ye will not cease of your language, for you wot well, Sir Gawaine,
I know your might, and all that ye may do, and well ye wot, Sir
Gawaine, ye may not greatly hurt me. Come down, traitor knight, said
he, and make it good the contrary with thy hands; for it mishapped me
the last battle to be hurt of thy hands, therefore, wit thou well, that
I am come this day to make amends, for I ween this day to lay thee as
low as thou laidest me. Defend me, said Sir Launcelot, that ever I be
so far in your danger as ye have been in mine, for then my days were
done. But Sir Gawaine, said Sir Launcelot, ye shall not think that I
tarry long, but sithen that ye so unknightly call me of treason, ye
shall have both your hands full of me. And then Sir Launcelot armed him
at all points, and mounted upon his horse, and gat a great spear in his
hand, and rode out at the gate. And both the hosts were assembled, of
them without, and of them within, and stood in array full manly. And
both parties were charged to hold them still, to see and behold the
battle of these two noble knights. And then they laid their spears in
their rests, and they came together as thunder. And Sir Gawaine brake
his spear upon Sir Launcelot in an hundred pieces unto his hand, and
Sir Launcelot smote him with a greater might, that Sir Gawaine's horse
feet raised, and so the horse and he fell to the earth. Then Sir
Gawaine deliverly avoided his horse, and put his shield afore him, and
eagerly drew his sword, and bad Sir Launcelot, Alight, traitor knight,
for if this mare's son hath failed me, wit thou well a king's son and a
queen's son shall not fail thee.

Then Sir Launcelot avoided his horse, and dressed his shield afore him,
and drew his sword, and so stood they together, and gave many sad
strokes, that all men on both parties had thereof passing great wonder.
But when Sir Launcelot felt Sir Gawaine's might so marvellously
increase, he then withheld his courage and his wind, and kept himself
wonder covert of his might, and under his shield he traced and
traversed here and there, to break Sir Gawaine's strokes and his
courage; and Sir Gawaine enforced himself with all his might and power
to destroy Sir Launcelot, for, as the French book saith, ever as Sir
Gawaine's might increased, right so increased his wind and his evil
will. Thus Sir Gawaine did great pain unto Sir Launcelot three hours,
that he had great pain for to defend him. And when the three hours were
passed, that Sir Launcelot felt that Sir Gawaine was come to his own
proper strength, then Sir Launcelot said unto Sir Gawaine, Now have I
proved you twice, that ye are a full dangerous knight, and a wonderful
man of your might, and many wonderful deeds have you done in your days:
for by your might increasing you have deceived many a full noble and
valiant knight; and now I feel that ye have done your mighty deeds. Now
wit you well I must do my deeds. And then Sir Launcelot stood near Sir
Gawaine, and then Sir Launcelot doubled his strokes, and Sir Gawaine
defended him mightily. But nevertheless Sir Launcelot smote such a
stroke upon Sir Gawaine's helm, and upon the old wound, that Sir
Gawaine sinked down upon his one side in a swoon. And anon as he did
awake, he waved and foined at Sir Launcelot as he lay, and said,
Traitor knight, wit thou well I am not yet slain: come thou near me,
and perform this battle unto the uttermost. I will no more do than I
have done, said Sir Launcelot; for when I see you on foot I will do
battle upon you all the while I see you stand on your feet; but for to
smite a wounded man, that may not stand, God defend me from such a
shame. And then he turned him and went his way toward the city, and Sir
Gawaine evermore calling him traitor knight, and said, Wit thou well,
Sir Launcelot, when I am whole, I shall do battle with thee again; for
I shall never leave thee till that one of us be slain. Thus as this
siege endured, and as Sir Gawaine lay sick near a month, and when he
was well recovered, and ready within three days to do battle again with
Sir Launcelot, right so came tidings unto Arthur from England, that
made king Arthur and all his host to remove.
