The Twenty-First Book.
======================

CHAPTER I.
----------

_How Sir Mordred presumed and took on him to be king of England, and
would have married the queen, his uncle's wife._

As Sir Mordred was ruler of all England, he did do make letters as
though that they came from beyond the sea, and the letters specified
that king Arthur was slain in battle with Sir Launcelot. Wherefore Sir
Mordred made a Parliament, and called the lords together, and there he
made them to choose him king, and so was he crowned at Canterbury, and
held a feast there fifteen days, and afterward he drew him unto
Winchester, and there he took the queen Guenever, and said plainly,
that he would wed her which was his uncle's wife, and his father's
wife. And so he made ready for the feast, and a day prefixed that they
should be wedded; wherefore queen Guenever was passing heavy. But she
durst not discover her heart, but spake fair, and agreed to Sir
Mordred's will. Then she desired of Sir Mordred for to go to London, to
buy all manner of things that longed unto the wedding. And because of
her fair speech Sir Mordred trusted her well enough, and gave her leave
to go. And so when she came to London, she took the tower of London,
and suddenly, in all haste possible, she stuffed it with all manner of
victual, and well garnished it with men, and so kept it. Then when Sir
Mordred wist and understood how he was beguiled, he was passing wroth
out of measure. And a short tale for to make, he went and laid a mighty
siege about the tower of London, and made many great assaults thereat,
and threw many great engines unto them, and shot great guns. But all
might not prevail Sir Mordred, for queen Guenever would never, for fair
speech nor for foul, would never trust to come in his hands again. And
then came the bishop of Canterbury, the which was a noble clerk and an
holy man, and thus he said to Sir Mordred: Sir, what will ye do, will
ye first displease God, and sithen shame yourself and all knighthood?
Is not king Arthur your uncle, no further but your mother's brother,
and are ye not his son, therefore how may ye wed your father's wife?
Sir, said the noble clerk, leave this opinion, or else I shall curse
you with book, and bell, and candle. Do thou thy worst, said Sir
Mordred, wit thou well I shall defy thee. Sir, said the bishop, and wit
you well I shall not fear me to do that me ought to do. Also where ye
noise where my lord Arthur is slain, and that is not so, and therefore
ye will make a foul work in this land. Peace, thou false priest, said
Sir Mordred, for, and thou chafe me any more, I shall make strike off
thy head. So the bishop departed, and did the curse in the most
orgulous wise that might be done. And then Sir Mordred sought the
bishop of Canterbury for to have slain him. Then the bishop fled, and
took part of his goods with him, and went nigh unto Glastonbury, and
there he was as priest hermit in a chapel, and lived in poverty and in
holy prayers: for well he understood that mischievous war was at hand.
Then Sir Mordred sought on queen Guenever by letters and sondes, and by
fair means and foul means, for to have her to come out of the tower of
London, but all this availed not, for she answered him shortly, openly
and privily, that she had lever slay herself than to be married with
him. Then came word to Sir Mordred that king Arthur had raised the
siege from Sir Launcelot, and he was coming homeward with a great host,
to be avenged upon Sir Mordred. Wherefore Sir Mordred made write writs
to all the barony of this land, and much people drew to him. For then
was the common voice among them, that with Arthur was none other life
but war and strife, and with Sir Mordred was great joy and bliss. Thus
was Sir Arthur depraved and evil said of. And many there were that king
Arthur had made up of nought, and given them lands, might not then say
of him a good word.

Lo ye, all Englishmen, see ye not what a mischief here was, for he that
was the most king and knight of the world, and most loved the
fellowship of noble knights, and by him they were all upholden. Now
might not these Englishmen hold us content with him. Lo, thus was the
old custom and usage of this land. And also men say, that we of this
land have not yet lost nor forgotten that custom and usage. Alas, this
is a great default of all Englishmen, for there may no thing please us
no term. And so fared the people at that time; they were better pleased
with Sir Mordred than they were with king Arthur, and much people drew
unto Sir Mordred, and said they would abide with him for better and for
worse. And so Sir Mordred drew with a great host to Dover, for there he
heard say that Sir Arthur would arrive, and so he thought to beat his
own father from his lands. And the most party of all England held with
Sir Mordred, the people were so new fangle.


CHAPTER II.
-----------

_How after that king Arthur had tidings he returned and came to Dover,
where Sir Mordred met him to let his landing, and of the death of Sir
Gawaine._

And so as Sir Mordred was at Dover with his host, there came king
Arthur with a great navy of ships, galleys, and carracks. And there was
Sir Mordred ready awaiting upon his landage, to let his own father to
land upon the land that he was king over. Then there was launching of
great boats and small, and full of noble men of arms, and there was
much slaughter of gentle knights, and many a full bold baron was laid
full low on both parties. But king Arthur was so courageous, that there
might no manner of knights let him to land, and his knights fiercely
followed him. And so they landed, maugre Sir Mordred and all his power,
and put Sir Mordred aback, that he fled and all his people. So when
this battle was done, king Arthur let bury his people that were dead,
and then was the noble knight Sir Gawaine found in a great boat lying
more than half dead. When Sir Arthur wist that Sir Gawaine was laid so
low, he went unto him, and there the king made sorrow out of measure,
and took Sir Gawaine in his arms, and thrice he there swooned. And when
he awaked he said, Alas, Sir Gawaine, my sister's son, here now thou
liest, the man in the world that I loved most, and now is my joy gone:
for now, my nephew Sir Gawaine, I will discover me unto your person; in
Sir Launcelot and you I most had my joy, and mine affiance, and now
have I lost my joy of you both, wherefore all mine earthly joy is gone
from me. Mine uncle king Arthur, said Sir Gawaine, wit you well, my
death day is come, and all is through mine own hastiness and
wilfulness, for I am smitten upon the old wound the which Sir Launcelot
gave me, on the which I feel well I must die, and had Sir Launcelot
been with you as he was, this unhappy war had never begun, and of all
this am I causer, for Sir Launcelot and his blood through their prowess
held all your cankered enemies in subjection and danger: and now, said
Sir Gawaine, ye shall miss Sir Launcelot. But, alas, I would not accord
with him, and therefore, said Sir Gawaine, I pray you, fair uncle, that
I may have paper, pen, and ink, that I may write to Sir Launcelot a
schedule with mine own hands. And then when paper and ink was brought,
then Gawaine was set up weakly by king Arthur, for he was shriven a
little tofore, and then he wrote thus, as the French book maketh
mention,--Unto Sir Launcelot, flower of all noble knights that ever I
heard of, or saw by my days, I Sir Gawaine, king Lot's son, of Orkney,
sister's son unto the noble king Arthur, send thee greeting, and let
thee have knowledge, that the tenth day of May I was smitten upon the
old wound that thou gavest me afore the city of Benwick, and through
the same wound that thou gavest me I am come to my death-day. And I
will that all the world wit that I, Sir Gawaine, knight of the Table
Round, sought my death, and not through thy deserving, but it was mine
own seeking, wherefore I beseech thee, Sir Launcelot, to return again
unto this realm, and see my tomb, and pray some prayer, more or less,
for my soul. And this same day that I wrote this schedule, I was hurt
to the death in the same wound, the which I had of thy hand, Sir
Launcelot. For of a more nobler man might I not be slain. Also, Sir
Launcelot, for all the love that ever was betwixt us, make no tarrying,
but come over the sea in all haste, that thou mayest with thy noble
knights rescue that noble king that made thee knight, that is my lord
Arthur, for he is full straitly bestad with a false traitor, that is my
half brother Sir Mordred, and he hath let crown him king, and would
have wedded my lady queen Guenever, and so had he done, had she not put
herself in the tower of London. And so the tenth day of May last past,
my lord Arthur and we all landed upon them at Dover, and there we put
that false traitor Sir Mordred to flight, and there it misfortuned me
to be stricken upon thy stroke, and at the date of this letter was
written but two hours and an half afore my death, written with mine own
hand, and so subscribed with part of my heart's blood. And I require
thee, most famous knight of the world, that thou wilt see my tomb.--And
then Sir Gawaine wept, and king Arthur wept, and then they swooned
both. And when they awaked both, the king made Sir Gawaine to receive
his Saviour. And then Sir Gawaine prayed the king to send for Sir
Launcelot, and to cherish him above all other knights. And so at the
hour of noon, Sir Gawaine yielded up the spirit. And then the king let
inter him in a chapel within Dover castle; and there yet all men may
see the skull of him, and the same wound is seen that Sir Launcelot
gave him in battle. Then was it told king Arthur that Sir Mordred had
pitched a new field upon Barham Down. And upon the morn the king rode
thither to him, and there was a great battle betwixt them, and much
people were slain on both parties. But at the last Sir Arthur's party
stood best, and Sir Mordred and his party fled unto Canterbury.


CHAPTER III.
------------

_How after Sir Gawaine's ghost appeared to king Arthur, and warned him
that he should not fight that day._

And then the king let search all the towns for his knights that were
slain, and interred them; and salved them with soft salves that so sore
were wounded. Then much people drew unto king Arthur. And then they
said that Sir Mordred warred upon king Arthur with wrong. And then king
Arthur drew him with his host down by the sea side, westward toward
Salisbury, and there was a day assigned between king Arthur and Sir
Mordred, and they should meet upon a down beside Salisbury, and not far
from the sea side, and this day was assigned on a Monday after Trinity
Sunday, whereof king Arthur was passing glad, that he might be avenged
upon Sir Mordred. Then Sir Mordred araised much people about London,
for they of Kent, Southsex, and Surrey, Estsex, and Southfolk, and of
Northfolk, held the most party with Sir Mordred, and many a full noble
knight drew unto Sir Mordred and to the king; but they that loved Sir
Launcelot drew unto Sir Mordred. So upon Trinity Sunday at night king
Arthur dreamed a wonderful dream, and that was this, that him seemed he
sat upon a chaflet in a chair, and the chair was fast to a wheel, and
thereupon sat king Arthur in the richest cloth of gold that might be
made: and the king thought there was under him, far from him, an
hideous deep black water, and therein were all manner of serpents, and
worms, and wild beasts, fowl and horrible: and suddenly the king
thought the wheel turned up so down, and he fell among the serpents,
and every beast took him by a limb. And then the king cried as he lay
in his bed and slept, Help! And then knights, squires, and yeomen
awaked the king; and then he was so amazed that he wist not where he
was. And then he fell on slumbering again, not sleeping nor thoroughly
waking. So the king seemed verily that there came Sir Gawaine unto him
with a number of fair ladies with him. And when king Arthur saw him,
then he said, Welcome, my sister's son, I wend thou hadst been dead,
and now I see thee on live, much am I beholding unto Almighty Jesu. Oh,
fair nephew, and my sister's son, what be these ladies that hither be
come with you? Sir, said Sir Gawaine, all these be ladies for whom I
have foughten when I was man living: and all these are those that I did
battle for in righteous quarrel. And God hath given them that grace at
their great prayer, because I did battle for them, that they should
bring me hither unto you, thus much had God given me leave, for to warn
you of your death; for and ye fight as to-morn with Sir Mordred, as ye
both have assigned, doubt ye not ye must be slain, and the most part of
your people on both parties. And for the great grace and goodness that
Almighty Jesu hath unto you, and for pity of you and many more other
good men there shall be slain, God hath sent me to you, of his special
grace, to give you warning, that in no wise ye do battle as to-morn,
but that ye take a treaty for a month day; and proffer you largely, so
as to-morn to be put in a delay. For within a month shall come Sir
Launcelot, with all his noble knights, and rescue you worshipfully, and
slay Sir Mordred and all that ever will hold with him. Then Sir Gawaine
and all the ladies vanished. And anon the king called upon his knights,
squires, and yeomen, and charged them wightly to fetch his noble lords
and wise bishops unto him. And when they were come, the king told them
his vision, what Sir Gawaine had told him, and warned him that if he
fought on the morn he should be slain. Then the king commanded Sir
Lucan de butlere, and his brother Sir Bedivere, with two bishops with
them, and charged them in any wise and they might take a treaty for a
month day with Sir Mordred;--And spare not, proffer him lands and
goods, as much as ye think best. So then they departed, and came to Sir
Mordred, where he had a grim host of an hundred thousand men. And there
they intreated Sir Mordred long time, and at the last Sir Mordred was
agreed for to have Cornwall and Kent, by king Arthur's days:--after,
all England, after the days of king Arthur.


CHAPTER IV.
-----------

_How by misadventure of an adder the battle began, where Mordred was
slain, and Arthur hurt to the death._

Then were they condescended that king Arthur and Sir Mordred should
meet betwixt both their hosts, and every each of them should bring
fourteen persons. And they came with this word unto king Arthur. Then
said he, I am glad that this is done. And so he went into the field.
And when Arthur should depart, he warned all his host that and they see
any sword drawn, Look ye come on fiercely, and slay that traitor Sir
Mordred, for I in no wise trust him. In like wise Sir Mordred warned
his host that,--And ye see any sword drawn, look that ye come on
fiercely, and so slay all that ever before you standeth: for in no wise
I will not trust for this treaty: for I know well my father will be
avenged upon me. And so they met as their pointment was, and so they
were agreed and accorded thoroughly: and wine was fetched, and they
drank. Right so came an adder out of a little heath bush, and it stung
a knight on the foot. And when the knight felt him stungen, he looked
down and saw the adder, and then he drew his sword to slay the adder,
and thought of none other harm. And when the host on both parties saw
that sword drawn, then they blew beames, trumpets, and horns, and
shouted grimly. And so both hosts dressed them together. And king
Arthur took his horse, and said, Alas this unhappy day, and so rode to
his party: and Sir Mordred in likewise. And never was there seen a more
dolefuller battle in no christian land. For there was but rushing and
riding, foining and striking, and many a grim word was there spoken
either to other, and many a deadly stroke. But ever king Arthur rode
throughout the battle of Sir Mordred many times, and did full nobly as
a noble king should; and at all times he fainted never. And Sir Mordred
that day put him in devoir, and in great peril. And thus they fought
all the long day, and never stinted, till the noble knights were laid
to the cold ground, and ever they fought still, till it was near night,
and by that time was there an hundred thousand laid dead upon the down.
Then was Arthur wroth out of measure, when he saw his people so slain
from him. Then the king looked about him, and then was he ware of all
his host, and of all his good knights, were left no more on live but
two knights, that was Sir Lucan de butlere, and his brother Sir
Bedivere: and they full were sore wounded. Jesu mercy, said the king,
where are all my noble knights becomen. Alas that ever I should see
this doleful day. For now, said Arthur, I am come to mine end. But
would to God that I wist where were that traitor Sir Mordred, that hath
caused all this mischief. Then was king Arthur ware where Sir Mordred
leaned upon his sword among a great heap of dead men. Now give me my
spear, said Arthur unto Sir Lucan, for yonder I have espied the traitor
that all this woe hath wrought. Sir, let him be, said Sir Lucan, for he
is unhappy: and if ye pass this unhappy day, ye shall be right well
revenged upon him. Good lord, remember ye of your night's dream, and
what the spirit of Sir Gawaine told you this night, yet God of his
great goodness hath preserved you hitherto. Therefore, for God's sake,
my lord, leave off by this. For blessed be God ye have won the field:
for here we be three on live, and with Sir Mordred is none on live. And
if ye leave off now, this wicked day of destiny is past. Tide me death,
betide me life, saith the king, now I see him yonder alone, he shall
never escape mine hands, for at a better avail shall I never have him.
God speed you well, said Sir Bedivere. Then the king gat his spear in
both his hands, and ran toward Sir Mordred, crying, Traitor, now is thy
death day come. And when Sir Mordred heard Sir Arthur, he ran until him
with his sword drawn in his hand. And then king Arthur smote Sir
Mordred under the shield, with a foin of his spear throughout the body
more than a fathom. And when Sir Mordred felt that he had his death's
wound, he thrust himself, with the might that he had, up to the bur of
king Arthur's spear. And right so he smote his father Arthur with his
sword holden in both his hands, on the side of the head, that the sword
pierced the helmet and the brain-pan, and therewithal Sir Mordred fell
stark dead to the earth. And the noble Arthur fell in a swoon to the
earth, and there he swooned oft-times. And Sir Lucan de butlere and Sir
Bedivere oft-times heaved him up, and so weakly they led him betwixt
them both to a little chapel not far from the sea side. And when the
king was there, he thought him well eased. Then heard they people cry
in the field. Now go thou, Sir Lucan, said the king, and do me to wit
what betokens that noise in the field. So Sir Lucan departed, for he
was grievously wounded in many places. And so as he went, he saw and
hearkened by the moon-light, how the pillers and robbers were come into
the field to pill and to rob many a full noble knight of broaches and
beads, of many a good ring, and of many a rich jewel; and who that were
not dead all out, there they slew them for their harness and their
riches. When Sir Lucan understood this work, he came to the king as
soon as he might, and told him all what he had heard and seen.
Therefore by mine advice, said Sir Lucan, it is best that we bring you
to some town. I would it were so, said the king,--


CHAPTER V.
----------

_How king Arthur commanded to cast his sword Excalibur into the water,
and how he was delivered to ladies in a barge._

But I may not stand, my head works so. Ah, Sir Launcelot, said king
Arthur, this day have I sore missed thee. Alas, that ever I was against
thee, for now have I my death, whereof Sir Gawaine me warned in my
dream. Then Sir Lucan took up the king the one part, and Sir Bedivere
the other part, and in the lifting, the king swooned, and Sir Lucan
fell in a swoon with the lift, that the part of his bowels fell out of
his body, and therewith the noble knight's heart brast. And when king
Arthur came to himself again, he beheld Sir Lucan how he lay foaming at
the mouth, and part of his bowels lay at his feet. Alas, said the king,
this is unto me a full heavy sight to see this noble duke so die for my
sake, for he would have holpen me that had more need of help than I.
Alas, he would not complain him, his heart was so set to help me. Now
Jesu have mercy upon his soul. Then Sir Bedivere wept for the death of
his brother. Leave this mourning and weeping, said the king, for all
this will not avail me: for, wit thou well, and I might live myself the
death of Sir Lucan would grieve me evermore; but my time hieth fast,
said the king. Therefore, said Arthur, take thou Excalibur, my good
sword, and go with it to yonder water side, and when thou comest there,
I charge thee throw my sword in that water, and come again, and tell me
what thou there seest. My lord, said Bedivere, your commandment shall
be done, and lightly bring you word again. So Sir Bedivere departed,
and by the way he beheld that noble sword, that the pommel and haft
were all of precious stones, and then he said to himself, If I throw
this rich sword in the water, thereof shall never come good, but harm
and loss. And then Sir Bedivere hid Excalibur under a tree. And as soon
as he might he came again unto the king, and said he had been at the
water, and had thrown the sword into the water. What sawest thou there?
said the king. Sir, he said, I saw nothing but waves and winds. That is
untruly said of thee, said the king; therefore go thou lightly again,
and do my command as thou art to me lief and dear, spare not, but throw
it in. Then Sir Bedivere returned again, and took the sword in his
hand; and then him thought sin and shame to throw away that noble
sword; and so eft he hid the sword, and returned again, and told to the
king that he had been at the water, and done his commandment. What saw
thou there? said the king. Sir, he said, I saw nothing but the waters
wap and the waves wan. Ah traitor, untrue, said king Arthur, now hast
thou betrayed me twice. Who would have wend that thou that hast been to
me so lief and dear, and thou art named a noble knight, and would
betray me for the riches of the sword. But now go again lightly, for
thy long tarrying putteth me in great jeopardy of my life, for I have
taken cold. And but if thou do now as I bid thee, if ever I may see
thee, I shall slay thee with mine own hands, for thou wouldest for my
rich sword see me dead. Then Sir Bedivere departed, and went to the
sword, and lightly took it up, and went to the water side, and there he
bound the girdle about the hilts, and then he threw the sword as far
into the water as he might, and there came an arm and an hand above the
water, and met it, and caught it, and so shook it thrice and
brandished, and then vanished away the hand with the sword in the
water. So Sir Bedivere came again to the king, and told him what he
saw. Alas, said the king, help me hence, for I dread me I have tarried
over long. Then Sir Bedivere took the king upon his back, and so went
with him to that water side. And when they were at the water side, even
fast by the bank hoved a little barge, with many fair ladies in it, and
among them all was a queen, and all they had black hoods, and all they
wept and shrieked when they saw king Arthur. Now put me into the barge,
said the king: and so he did softly. And there received him three
queens with great mourning, and so they set him down, and in one of
their laps king Arthur laid his head, and then that queen said, Ah,
dear brother, why have ye tarried so long from me? Alas, this wound on
your head hath caught over much cold. And so then they rowed from the
land; and Sir Bedivere beheld all those ladies go from him. Then Sir
Bedivere cried, Ah, my lord Arthur, what shall become of me now ye go
from me, and leave me here alone among mine enemies. Comfort thyself,
said the king, and do as well as thou mayest, for in me is no trust for
to trust in. For I will into the vale of Avilion, to heal me of my
grievous wound. And if thou hear never more of me, pray for my soul.
But ever the queens and the ladies wept and shrieked, that it was pity
to hear. And as soon as Sir Bedivere had lost the sight of the barge,
he wept and wailed, and so took the forest, and so he went all that
night, and in the morning he was ware betwixt two holts hoar of a
chapel and an hermitage.


CHAPTER VI.
-----------

_How Sir Bedivere found him on the morrow dead in an hermitage, and how
he abode there with the hermit._

Then was Sir Bedivere glad, and thither he went; and when he came into
the chapel, he saw where lay an hermit groveling on all four, there
fast by a tomb was new graven. When the hermit saw Sir Bedivere, he
knew him well, for he was but a little before bishop of Canterbury,
that Sir Mordred banished. Sir, said Sir Bedivere, what man is there
interred that ye pray so fast for? Fair son, said the hermit, I wot not
verily, but by deeming. But this night, at midnight, here came a number
of ladies, and brought hither a dead corpse, and prayed me to bury him;
and here they offered an hundred tapers, and gave me an hundred
besants. Alas, said Sir Bedivere, that was my lord king Arthur, that
here lieth buried in this chapel! Then Sir Bedivere swooned, and when
he awoke he prayed the hermit he might abide with him still there, to
live with fasting and prayers. For from hence will I never go, said Sir
Bedivere, by my will, but all the days of my life here to pray for my
lord Arthur. Ye are welcome to me, said the hermit, for I know you
better than ye ween that I do. Ye are the bold Bedivere, and the full
noble duke Sir Lucan de butlere was your brother. Then Sir Bedivere
told the hermit all as ye have heard tofore. So there bode Sir Bedivere
with the hermit, that was tofore bishop of Canterbury, and there Sir
Bedivere put upon him poor clothes, and served the hermit full lowly in
fasting and in prayers.

Thus of Arthur I find never more written in books that be authorized,
nor more of the certainty of his death heard I never tell, but thus was
he led away in a ship wherein were three queens; that one was king
Arthur's sister queen Morgan le Fay; the other was the queen of
Northgalis; the third was the queen of the Waste Lands. Also there was
Nimue, the chief Lady of the lake, that had wedded Pelleas the good
knight; and this lady had done much for king Arthur; for she would
never suffer Sir Pelleas to be in no place where he should be in danger
of his life, and so he lived to the uttermost of his days with her in
great rest. More of the death of king Arthur could I never find, but
that ladies brought him to his burials; and such one was buried there,
that the hermit bare witness that some time was bishop of Canterbury,
but yet the hermit knew not in certain that he was verily the body of
king Arthur;--for this tale Sir Bedivere, knight of the Round Table,
made it to be written.


CHAPTER VII.
------------

_Of the opinion of some men of the death of king Arthur; and how queen
Guenever made her a nun in Almesbury._

Yet some men yet say in many parts of England that king Arthur is not
dead, but had by the will of our Lord Jesu in another place. And men
say that he shall come again, and he shall win the holy cross. I will
not say it shall be so, but rather I will say, here in this world he
changed his life. But many men say that there is written upon his tomb
this verse,

> Hic iacet Arthurus Rex quondam Rex que futurus.

Thus leave I here Sir Bedivere with the hermit, that dwelled that time
in a chapel beside Glastonbury, and there was his hermitage. And so
they lived in their prayers and fastings and great abstinence. And when
queen Guenever understood that king Arthur was slain, and all the noble
knights, Sir Mordred and all the remnant, then the queen stole away,
and five ladies with her, and so she went to Almesbury, and there she
let make herself a nun, and wore white clothes and black, and great
penance she took, as ever did sinful lady in this land, and never
creature could make her merry, but lived in fasting, prayers, and
alms-deeds, that all manner of people marvelled how virtuously she was
changed. Now leave we queen Guenever in Almesbury a nun in white
clothes and black, and there she was abbess and ruler, as reason would;
and turn we from her, and speak we of Sir Launcelot du Lake.


CHAPTER VIII.
-------------

_How when Sir Launcelot heard of the death of king Arthur, and of Sir
Gawaine, and other matters, he came into England._

And when he heard in his country that Sir Mordred was crowned king in
England, and made war against king Arthur his own father, and would let
him to land in his own land; also it was told Sir Launcelot how that
Sir Mordred had laid siege about the tower of London, because the queen
would not wed him; then was Sir Launcelot wroth out of measure, and
said to his kinsmen, Alas, that double traitor Sir Mordred, now me
repenteth that ever he escaped my hands, for much shame hath he done
unto my lord Arthur. For all I feel by the doleful letter that my lord
Gawaine sent me, on whose soul Jesu have mercy, that my lord Arthur is
right hard bested. Alas, said Sir Launcelot, that ever I should live to
hear that most noble king, that made me knight, thus to be overset with
his subject in his own realm. And this doleful letter that my lord Sir
Gawaine hath sent me afore his death, praying me to see his tomb, wit
you well his doleful words shall never go from mine heart. For he was a
full noble knight as ever was born, and in an unhappy hour was I born,
that ever I should have that unhap to slay first Sir Gawaine, Sir
Gaheris the good knight, and mine own friend Sir Gareth, that full
noble knight. Alas, I may say I am unhappy, said Sir Launcelot, that
ever I should do thus unhappily; and, alas, yet might I never have hap
to slay that traitor Sir Mordred. Leave your complaints, said Sir Bors,
and first revenge you of the death of Sir Gawaine, and it will be well
done that ye see Sir Gawaine's tomb, and secondly that ye revenge my
lord Arthur and my lady queen Guenever. I thank you, said Sir
Launcelot, for ever ye will my worship. Then they made them ready in
all the haste that might be, with ships and galleys with Sir Launcelot
and his host, to pass into England. And so he passed over the sea till
he came to Dover: and there he landed with seven kings, and the number
was hideous to behold. Then Sir Launcelot enquired of men of Dover
where was king Arthur become? Then the people told him how that he was
slain, and Sir Mordred and an hundred thousand died on a day, and how
Sir Mordred gave king Arthur there the first battle at his landing, and
there was good Sir Gawaine slain, and on the morn Sir Mordred fought
with the king upon Barham Down, and there the king put Sir Mordred to
the worse. Alas, said Sir Launcelot, this is the heaviest tidings that
ever came to me. Now, fair sirs, said Sir Launcelot, shew me the tomb
of Sir Gawaine. And then certain people of the town brought him into
the castle of Dover, and showed him the tomb. Then Sir Launcelot
kneeled down and wept and prayed heartily for his soul. And that night
he made a dole, and all they that would come had as much flesh, fish,
wine, and ale, and every man and woman had twelve pence, come who
would. Thus with his own hand dealt he his money in a mourning gown;
and ever he wept, and prayed them to pray for the soul of Sir Gawaine.
And on the morn all the priests and clerks that might be gotten in the
country were there, and sung mass of Requiem. And there offered first
Sir Launcelot and he offered an hundred pound, and then the seven kings
offered forty pound a piece, and also there was a thousand knights, and
each of them offered a pound, and the offering dured from morn till
night. And Sir Launcelot lay two nights on his tomb in prayers and in
weeping. Then on the third day Sir Launcelot called the kings, dukes,
earls, barons and knights, and said thus: My fair lords, I thank you
all of your coming into this country with me; but we come too late, and
that shall repent me while I live, but against death may no man rebel.
But sithen it is so, said Sir Launcelot, I will myself ride and seek my
lady queen Guenever, for as I hear say, she hath great pain and much
disease, and I heard say that she is fled into the west country,
therefore ye all that abide me here, and but if I come again within
fifteen days, then take your ships, and your fellowship, and depart
into your country. For I will do as I say to you.


CHAPTER IX.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot departed to seek the queen Guenever, and how he
found her at Almesbury._

Then came Sir Bors de Ganis, and said, My lord Sir Launcelot, what
think ye for to do, now to ride in this realm? wit thou well ye shall
find few friends. Be as be may, said Sir Launcelot, keep you still
here, for I will forth on my journey, and no man nor child shall go
with me. So it was no boot to strive, but he departed and rode
westerly, and there he sought a seven or eight days, and at the last he
came to a nunnery, and then was queen Guenever ware of Sir Launcelot as
he walked in the cloister, and when she saw him there she swooned
thrice, that all the ladies and gentlewomen had work enough to hold the
queen up. So when she might speak, she called ladies and gentlewomen to
her, and said, Ye marvel, fair ladies, why I make this fare. Truly, she
said, it is for the sight of yonder knight that yonder standeth:
wherefore, I pray you all, call him to me. When Sir Launcelot was
brought to her, then she said to all the ladies, Through this man and
me hath all this war been wrought, and the death of the most noblest
knights of the world; for through our love that we have loved together
is my most noble lord slain. Therefore, Sir Launcelot, wit thou well I
am set in such a plight to get my soul's health; and yet I trust,
through God's grace, that after my death to have a sight of the blessed
face of Christ, and at doomsday to sit on his right side, for as sinful
as ever I was are saints in heaven. Therefore, Sir Launcelot, I require
thee and beseech thee heartily, for all the love that ever was betwixt
us, that thou never see me more in the visage; and I command thee on
God's behalf, that thou forsake my company, and to thy kingdom thou
turn again and keep well thy realm from war and wrack. For as well as I
have loved thee, mine heart will not serve me to see thee; for through
thee and me is the flower of kings and knights destroyed. Therefore,
Sir Launcelot, go to thy realm, and there take thee a wife, and live
with her with joy and bliss, and I pray thee heartily pray for me to
our Lord, that I may amend my mis-living. Now, sweet madam, said Sir
Launcelot, would ye that I should return again unto my country, and
there to wed a lady? Nay, madam, wit you well that shall I never do:
for I shall never be so false to you of that I have promised, but the
same destiny that ye have taken you to, I will take me unto, for to
please Jesu, and ever for you I cast me specially to pray. If thou wilt
do so, said the queen, hold thy promise; but I may never believe but
that thou wilt turn to the world again. Well, madam, said he, ye say as
pleaseth you, yet wist you me never false of my promise, and God defend
but I should forsake the world as ye have done. For in the quest of the
Sancgreal I had forsaken the vanities of the world, had not your lord
been. And if I had done so at that time with my heart, will, and
thought, I had passed all the knights that were in the Sancgreal,
except Sir Galahad my son. And therefore, lady, sithen ye have taken
you to perfection, I must needs take me to perfection of right. For I
take record of God, in you I have had mine earthly joy. And if I had
found you now so disposed, I had cast me to have had you into mine own
realm.


CHAPTER X.
----------

_How Sir Launcelot came to the hermitage where the archbishop of
Canterbury was, and how he took the habit on him._

But sithen I find you thus disposed, I insure you faithfully I will
ever take me to penance, and pray while my life lasteth, if that I may
find any hermit either grey or white that will receive me. Wherefore,
madam, I pray you kiss me, and never no more. Nay, said the queen, that
shall I never do, but abstain you from such works. And they departed.
But there was never so hard an hearted man, but he would have wept to
see the dolour that they made. For there was lamentation as they had
been stung with spears, and many times they swooned. And the ladies
bare the queen to her chamber, and Sir Launcelot awoke, and went and
took his horse, and rode all that day and all that night in a forest,
weeping. And at the last he was ware of an hermitage and a chapel stood
betwixt two cliffs, and then he heard a little bell ring to mass, and
thither he rode and alight, and tied his horse to the gate, and heard
mass. And he that sang mass was the bishop of Canterbury. Both the
bishop and Sir Bedivere knew Sir Launcelot, and they spake together
after mass. But when Sir Bedivere had told his tale all whole, Sir
Launcelot's heart almost brast for sorrow, and Sir Launcelot threw his
arms abroad, and said, Alas, who may trust this world! And then he
kneeled down on his knees, and prayed the Bishop to shrive him and
assoil him. And then he besought the bishop that he might be his
brother. Then the bishop said, I will gladly: and there he put an habit
upon Sir Launcelot, and there he served God day and night with prayers
and fastings.

Thus the great host abode at Dover. And then Sir Lionel took fifteen
lords with him, and rode to London to seek Sir Launcelot. And there Sir
Lionel was slain and many of his lords. Then Sir Bors de Ganis made the
great host for to go home again. And Sir Bors, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir
Blamor, Sir Bleoberis, with more other of Sir Launcelot's kin, look on
them to ride all England overthwart and endlong, to seek Sir Launcelot.
So Sir Bors by fortune rode so long till he came to the same chapel
where Sir Launcelot was. And so Sir Bors heard a little bell knell that
rang to mass, and there he alight, and heard mass. And when mass was
done, the bishop, Sir Launcelot, and Sir Bedivere came to Sir Bors. And
when Sir Bors saw Sir Launcelot in that manner clothing, then he prayed
the bishop that he might be in the same suit. And so there was an habit
put upon him, and there he lived in prayers and fasting. And within
half a year there was come Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir Blamor, Sir
Bleoberis, Sir Williars, Sir Clarrus, and Sir Gahalantine. So all these
seven noble knights there abode still. And when they saw Sir Launcelot
had taken him unto such perfection, they had no list to depart, but
took such an habit as he had. Thus they endured in great penance six
year, and then Sir Launcelot took the habit of priesthood, and a
twelvemonth he sang mass. And there was none of these other knights but
they read in books, and holp to sing mass, and rang bells, and did
bodily all manner of service. And so their horses went where they
would, for they took no regard of no worldly riches. For when they saw
Sir Launcelot endure such penance, in prayers and fasting, they took no
force what pain they endured, for to see the noblest knight of the
world take such abstinence, that he waxed full lean. And thus upon a
night there came a vision to Sir Launcelot, and charged him, in
remission of his sins, to haste him unto Almesbury,--And by then thou
come there, thou shalt find queen Guenever dead: and therefore take thy
fellows with thee, and purvey them of an horse bier, and fetch thou the
corpse of her, and bury her by her husband the noble king Arthur. So
this vision came to Launcelot thrice in one night.


CHAPTER XI.
-----------

_How Sir Launcelot went with his seven fellows to Almesbury, and found
there queen Guenever dead, whom they brought to Glastonbury._

Then Sir Launcelot rose up or day, and told the hermit. It were well
done, said the hermit, that ye made you ready, and that ye disobey not
the vision. Then Sir Launcelot took his seven fellows with him, and on
foot they went from Glastonbury to Almesbury, the which is little more
than thirty miles. And thither they came within two days, for they were
weak and feeble to go. And when Sir Launcelot was come to Almesbury,
within the nunnery, queen Guenever died but half an hour before. And
the ladies told Sir Launcelot that queen Guenever told them all, or she
passed, that Sir Launcelot had been priest near a twelvemonth,--And
hither he cometh as fast as he may to fetch my corpse: and beside my
lord king Arthur he shall bury me. Wherefore the queen said in hearing
of them all, I beseech Almighty God that I may never have power to see
Sir Launcelot with my worldly eyes. And thus, said all the ladies, was
ever her prayer these two days, till she was dead. Then Sir Launcelot
saw her visage, but he wept not greatly, but sighed. And so he did all
the observance of the service himself, both the Dirige, and on the morn
he sang mass. And there was ordained an horse bier; and so with an
hundred torches ever burning about the corpse of the queen, and ever
Sir Launcelot with his eight fellows went about the horse bier singing
and reading many an holy orison, and frankincense upon the corpse
incensed. Thus Sir Launcelot and his eight fellows went on foot from
Almesbury unto Glastonbury; and when they were come to the chapel and
the hermitage, there she had a Dirige with great devotion. And on the
morn the hermit, that sometime was bishop of Canterbury, sang the mass
of Requiem with great devotion: and Sir Launcelot was the first that
offered, and then all his eight fellows. And then she was wrapped in
cered cloth of Raines, from the top to the toe in thirty fold, and
after she was put in a web of lead, and then in a coffin of marble. And
when she was put in the earth, Sir Launcelot swooned, and lay long
still, while the hermit came out and awaked him, and said, Ye be to
blame, for ye displease God with such manner of sorrow making. Truly,
said Sir Launcelot, I trust I do not displease God, for He knoweth mine
intent, for my sorrow was not, nor is not, for any rejoicing of sin,
but my sorrow may never have end. For when I remember of her beauty,
and of her noblesse, that was both with her king and with her; so when
I saw his corpse and her corpse so lie together, truly mine heart would
not serve to sustain my careful body. Also when I remember me, how by
my default, mine orgule, and my pride, that they were both laid full
low, that were peerless that ever was living of Christian people, wit
you well, said Sir Launcelot, this remembered, of their kindness and
mine unkindness, sank so to my heart, that I might not sustain myself.
So the French book maketh mention.


CHAPTER XII.
------------

_How Sir Launcelot began to sicken, and after died, whose body was
borne to Joyous Gard for to be buried._

Then Sir Launcelot never after eat but little meat, nor drank, till he
was dead; for then he sickened more and more, and dried and dwined
away; for the bishop nor none of his fellows might not make him to eat,
and little he drank, that he was waxen by a cubit shorter than he was,
that the people could not know him; for evermore day and night he
prayed, but sometime he slumbered a broken sleep, and ever he was lying
groveling on the tomb of king Arthur and queen Guenever. And there was
no comfort that the bishop, nor Sir Bors, nor none of his fellows could
make him, it availed not. So within six weeks after, Sir Launcelot fell
sick, and lay in his bed; and then he sent for the bishop that there
was hermit, and all his true fellows. Then Sir Launcelot said with
dreary voice, Sir bishop, I pray you give to me all my rights that
longeth to a Christian man. It shall not need you, said the hermit and
all his fellows, it is but heaviness of your blood: ye shall be well
amended by the grace of God to-morn. My fair lords, said Sir Launcelot,
wit you well, my careful body will into the earth. I have warning more
then now I will say, therefore give me my rights. So when he was
houseled and eneled, and had all that a Christian man ought to have, he
prayed the bishop that his fellows might bear his body to Joyous Gard.
Some men say it was Anwick, and some men say it was Bamborow. Howbeit,
said Sir Launcelot, me repenteth sore, but I made mine avow sometime
that in Joyous Gard I would be buried, and because of breaking of mine
avow, I pray you all lead me thither. Then there was weeping and
wringing of hands among his fellows. So at a season of the night they
went all to their beds, for they all lay in one chamber. And so after
midnight, against day, the bishop that was hermit, as he lay in his bed
asleep, he fell upon a great laughter: and therewith all the fellowship
awoke, and came unto the bishop, and asked him what he ailed. Alas,
said the bishop, why did ye awake me, I was never in all my life so
merry and so well at ease. Wherefore? said Sir Bors. Truly, said the
bishop, here was Sir Launcelot with me, with more angels than ever I
saw men upon one day; and I saw the angels heave Sir Launcelot unto
heaven, and the gates of heaven opened against him. It is but the
vexing of dreams, said Sir Bors, for I doubt not Sir Launcelot aileth
nothing but good. It may well be, said the bishop, go ye to his bed,
and then shall ye prove the sooth. So when Sir Bors and his fellows
came to his bed they found him stark dead, and he lay as he had smiled,
and the sweetest savour about him that ever they felt. Then was there
weeping and wringing of hands, and the greatest dole they made that
ever made men. And on the morn the bishop did his mass of Requiem; and
after the bishop and all the nine knights put Sir Launcelot in the same
horse bier that queen Guenever was laid in tofore that she was buried:
and so the bishop and they altogether went with the corpse of Sir
Launcelot daily, till they came to Joyous Gard, and ever they had an
hundred torches burning about him; and so within fifteen days they came
to Joyous Gard. And there they laid his corpse in the body of the
quire, and sang and read many psalters and prayers over him and about
him; and ever his visage was laid open and naked, that all folk might
behold him; for such was the custom in those days, that all men of
worship should so lie with open visage till that they were buried. And
right thus as they were at their service, there came Sir Ector de
Maris, that had seven year sought all England, Scotland, and Wales,
seeking his brother Sir Launcelot.


CHAPTER XIII.
-------------

_How Sir Ector found Sir Launcelot his brother dead. And how
Constantine reigned next after Arthur, and of the end of this book._

And when Sir Ector heard such noise and light in the quire of Joyous
Gard, he alight and put his horse from him, and came into the quire,
and there he saw men sing and weep. And all they knew Sir Ector, but he
knew not them. Then went Sir Bors unto Sir Ector, and told him how
there lay his brother Sir Launcelot dead. And then Sir Ector threw his
shield, sword, and helm from him; and when he beheld Sir Launcelot's
visage he fell down in a swoon. And when he awaked it were hard any
tongue to tell the doleful complaints that he made for his brother. Ah,
Launcelot, he said, thou were head of all Christian knights; and now I
dare say, said Sir Ector, thou Sir Launcelot, there thou liest, that
thou were never matched of earthly knight's hand; and thou were the
courtiest knight that ever bare shield; and thou were the truest friend
to thy lover that ever bestrode horse; and thou were the truest lover
of a sinful man that ever loved woman; and thou were the kindest man
that ever strake with sword; and thou were the goodliest person ever
came among press of knights; and thou was the meekest man and the
gentlest that ever ate in hall among ladies; and thou were the sternest
knight to thy mortal foe that ever put spear in the rest.

Then there was weeping and dolour out of measure. Thus they kept Sir
Launcelot's corpse on loft fifteen days, and then they buried it with
great devotion. And then at leisure they went all with the bishop of
Canterbury to his hermitage, and there they were together more than a
month. Then Sir Constantine, that was Sir Cador's son, of Cornwall, was
chosen king of England; and he was a full noble knight, and
worshipfully he ruled this realm. And then this king Constantine sent
for the bishop of Canterbury, for he heard say where he was; and so he
was restored unto his bishopric, and left that hermitage; and Sir
Bedivere was there ever still hermit to his life's end. Then Sir Bors
de Ganis, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Gahalantine, Sir Galihud, Sir
Galihodin, Sir Blamor, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Williars le Valiant, Sir
Clarrus of Cleremont; all these knights drew them to their countries.
Howbeit king Constantine would have had them with him, but they would
not abide in this realm; and there they lived in their countries as
holy men. And some English books make mention that they went never out
of England after the death of Sir Launcelot, but that was but favour of
makers. For the French book maketh mention, and is authorised, that Sir
Bors, Sir Ector, Sir Blamor, and Sir Bleoberis, went into the holy
land, there as Jesu Christ was quick and dead, and anon as they had
stablished their lands; for the book saith so Sir Launcelot commanded
them for to do, or ever he passed out of this world. And these four
knights did many battles upon the miscreants or Turks. And there they
died upon a Good Friday, for God's sake.

Here is the end of the whole book of king Arthur, and of his noble
knights of the Round Table, that when they were whole together there
was ever an hundred and forty. And here is the end of the Death of
Arthur. I pray you all gentlemen and gentlewomen that read this book of
Arthur and his knights from the beginning to the ending, pray for me
while I am on live that God send me good deliverance, and when I am
dead, I pray you all pray for my soul; for this book was ended the
ninth year of the reign of king Edward the Fourth by Sir Thomas
Maleore, knight, as Jesu help him for his great might, as he is the
servant of Jesu both day and night.


End of the Twenty-First Book.
=============================
